Live from New York City for our audience
worldwide. Bloomberg's the Fed decides
starts right now.
>> This is a special edition of Bloomberg
Surveillance with Jonathan Pharaoh, Lisa
Abramowitz, and Tom Keane. Bloomberg
Surveillance, the Fed decides.
>> Live from New York City this afternoon.
Good afternoon. Good afternoon. For our
audience worldwide, that decision 27
minutes away. It's not about if they
cut, it's how much they cut by. 25 or
50.
>> And how do they signal the path ahead?
Do they give a sense of a neutral rate
that might look a little bit lower than
what we have seen before given the
composition, given some of the
pressures? And how do they understand
the dueling mandate of inflation versus
the labor?
>> You're way too technical for me. To me,
it's just absolutely historic. I mean,
John, you and I, the ECB emailed us one
day with a love note saying snoozefest.
It's not There's never been a meeting
like this. That's all there is to it.
This goes back to Mcchznney Martin in
1951. There's nothing sleepy about this
one. Three-part act, statement,
forecast, news conference. Can this Fed
meet this market?
>> This market has priced in a much greater
degree of rate cutting, not just at this
particular uh year, maybe not at this
meeting, but throughout the year, maybe
three rate cuts, but also this question
of the terminal rate.
>> Let's start with this market. Equities
doing nicely since the Fed last met.
Just off alltime highs on the S&P 500,
negative this afternoon by just a tenth
of 1%. In the bond market, this is a
very, very different bond market
compared to where we were when the Fed
last met. That 2-year was closer to 4%.
This afternoon, 353. That 10-year closer
to 450. This afternoon, closer to the
threes.
>> Yeah. And does we do we see a
ratification as you say, uh, do we get a
sense that that is what a lot of the Fed
officials are thinking? Coming up
shortly, we'll get the views of PGM's
Greg Peters, Kathy Jones of Charles
Schwab, and Stockgen Subraa. They'll be
taking us up to that Fed rate decision
at 2:00 p.m. Eastern. As John said, it
is a two-part act, three-part act.
Immediate reaction as we wait for the
press conference with JP Morgan's Bob
Michael, Diane Swan of KPMG, and
Deutsche Banks Matthew Lzetti. And
finally, breaking it all down. Chair
Powell's news conference has already
happened and we will be speaking with
former New York Fed President Bill
Dudley and Black Rockck's Jeff
Rosenberg.
>> And that is a stack lineup right there
through the next few hours. joining us
around the table, Greg Peters of Pion
Fixed Income. Greg, good afternoon.
>> It's good to see you.
>> Great to be here.
>> Can this Fed meet this market?
>> Uh, doubtful. Um, you know, there's a
lot of drama around this uh current
meeting. It seems to me it's almost like
a B-rated drama with interesting
subplots. So, I think 25 is obviously
assured. There is a, you know, a remote
chance of 50, but it's all about kind of
inside the inside. You know, what does
the SEP look like?
you know, how do we parse out kind of
the new participants? How political is
it? Uh how much games and chip is going
on? Uh so that's an interesting twist of
it, but the uh end result I think uh is
uneventful, honestly.
>> So the B-rated drama, I want to get into
this Mean Girls. Is that essentially
what you're going to be looking for?
>> I was thinking more like Sunday Night
Movie at Midnight.
>> Well, hold on a second, but this is
important. How do you view the B-rated
movie aspect of this given that some of
the personalities and projections might
actually become the mainstream, the sort
of core of the Fed's opinions come 2026?
>> Yeah. No, I you know that's quite right.
Right. So I I mean I think we'll learn
more over time. Um um and so we'll see
how quite frankly politicized the Fed is
internally and we'll see that through
the SE and the forecast. increasingly
you'll see it through uh through the
speeches uh but I guess the you know the
point today is you might see it through
the uh you know the descent side right
and so it feels like most people believe
there's you know three descents to ease
more but there's also a possibility of
descents on the other side so that could
actually really show some some bedum
kind of within I personally don't think
it's a bad thing uh I think just having
consensus all the time isn't
constructive but how this is manifesting
this time might be a little different
because it's uh playing a different
game, maybe a little more political than
normal.
>> And Wong's watching the Kansas City Fed
chief uh to the president, I should say,
to see what he does. I want to go where
Lisa was. I was kidding her about the
mandates, but we've got an inflation
study, a job study. Seven years ago,
pre- pandemic, Steven Roach and Morgan
Stanley wrote a blistering critique of
the Fed on asset bubbles. It's your
fault because you at Pium have priced
bonds to perfection. Price up, yield
down. Does he have to address today the
bond market asset bubble and the equity
market asset bubble? We're seeing China
stocks to the moon and the rest.
>> I don't think that's part of the
calculus. Honestly, I think the uh clear
focus is on inflation um and labor. Uh
the you know asset bubble uh is you know
not I think part of you know the
thinking at this current point. you
know, you go back to Greenspan and it
took years for that, uh, irrational
exuberance to play out. So, um, you
know, I think there was a, you know, a
lesson there. Uh, but I do think the
mandate is more tilted towards growth
than inflation. Um, and, uh, what that
means for 2026, what I don't think
enough people are talking about is what
does 2026 look like. So if you have uh
an environment where you have a fiscal
thrust coming through which is expected,
you have a more accommodative central
bank, uh you have kind of the pull
forward of AI productivity, what does
that do to inflation and what does that
do to growth? Um and so if you run an
economy really hot, then you know that
could change how the Fed thinks about
the rate path next year.
>> I'm very very pleased you've brought up
this issue. This could well be the last
time we get a forecast from Chairman Pal
without knowing who the next Federal
Reserve chair is actually going to be.
By the time you get to December, we
could have a pretty good idea of what
the postpal world looks like. Mark
Cabana of Bank of America asked a really
provocative question this morning and
he's asked it a few times. Why would
they stop at three? Why would they just
stop at 3%? How hot is this Fed with new
leadership willing to run things?
Well, you have to count on hope for the
credibility factor, right? And so I
think there's two different uh minds
here. So there's a mind of you know
getting into the role uh but then I
think ultimately uh your your reputation
is bond so to speak, right? So uh you
know I don't think anyone wants to taint
their own reputation or or really taint
a reputation of the Fed itself. So I do
think they they'll be contained by that.
Uh but it is an open question. We don't
know. So there is a bias to be more easy
I think but uh you know where neutral is
or where you know being accommodative is
is always an open question and I think
we'll test that thesis uh in 2026 for
sure.
>> This is a compelling point the idea that
the discipline will be imposed by the
bond market and ultimately the bond
vigilantes will come back particularly
at the long end and will impose a sense
of restraint on the Fed and on the
administration. Do they still exist if
there say is yield curve control or say
some sort of creative balance sheet use?
>> That's exactly the point. I actually
don't think there's such a thing as a
bond vigilante. I think that's an
artifact from artifact from the past. Uh
uh but I think from a bond investing
standpoint, it is really difficult to
lean in continuously into the steepener
view because of that risk, right? that
risk of changing the issuance uh in the
back end doing buybacks some form of
financial repression um and so it's a
very you know treacherous place to be
given that uh and that is why the US has
kind of outperformed other global
markets because of that they've done a
better job uh on the debt management
front number one and then number two uh
investors have a keen eye on changing
that dynamic to you know keep backend
yield down.
>> The inflation adjusted rate is a
residual. Sometimes it's hard to guess.
We've had the 10-year real yield come
down. I'm going to call it at the bottom
of the range. You're the pro on this.
What is the significance of with the
chitchat today? We get a real yield that
really breaks down.
>> I I I mean real yield is an interesting
measure, right? You know, one measure
high real yield means like that's a very
good growth environment. That's one that
you should should do well in from a risk
standpoint. uh you know post GFC it was
it was inverted and perverted in a way
where negative and low meant it was good
for risk takingaking. So I think we're
in a much more kind of normalized zone
which is to say uh having real yields u
you know kind of the 1% type of zip code
is where we're supposed to be. I think
that's a truer measure of economic
activity uh uh than uh you know the
previous kind of regime.
>> We've got about 60 seconds left in this
segment at least and we can continue
this conversation. How are you thinking
about the relationship between the
debate at the front end of the curve and
the story further out along the curve?
Are the two things connected right now?
If they drop yield to the front end,
what happens to the long end?
>> Well, they're connected and they're not
all at the same time. So, the front end
of the curve is a much cleaner place to
invest, right? Because it is clearly
driven by central bank policy. So the
closer you get to that central bank
policy reaction function, uh, uh, the
cleaner it is. As you go out the curve,
yes, it's driven by central bank policy
action, of course, but it's driven by so
many other factors that are beyond your
control, right? It has to do with
inflation, of course, growth
expectations, and this pesky term called
risk premium.
>> Brilliant. John, does Dr. Myron know
that?
>> I think Governor Myron does. I've got
some respect for Governor Myron going
into this meeting. He doesn't strike me
as the kind of guy who takes big swings
in the meeting. Will he take big swings
when it comes to the descent? I think
that's a very very different question
today. I don't think he's going to go in
and be rude to people and tell them
they're all doing a horrendous job, but
he could well be a little bit more
aggressive with that descent if we do
indeed get one.
>> In other words, 100 basis point rate
cut. Is that what he thought it was
deserved? Is that what we're going to
come out and speak to later today? That
I think is really
>> I'm not sure how much credible a number
closer to 100 would be.
>> Does that rule amount for any kind of
Fed contender? Greg Peters is going to
stick with us. Greg, it's good to have
you with us. Up next on the program,
Kathy Jones and Sebach Jappa.
[Music]
>> It does look like the Fed will cut 25
basis points.
>> 25 basis point cut.
>> If they do 25 bips or if they do even
50, the market should be able to take
it.
>> The Fed will still probably look be
looking for for two cuts this year.
three cuts this year and more to come
next year
>> somewhere between five and six 25 basis
point cuts out to 2026
>> if you continue to see this kind of
momentum on the labor market um you know
to get several more cuts in the back
half of the year
>> there are signs that you'll continue to
see that weakness in in the labor market
data
>> if you look at the trend uh it's
weakening
>> in the balance uh the Federal Reserve
will look at the labor market for now
but they have to keep one eye on
inflation
>> chair Powell better sound relatively
doubbish.
>> He's going to provide very limited
guidance.
>> The decision 15 minutes away. The
consensus view, a move of 25 basis
points. Two outliers. Sockgen standard
charted looking for 50 in about 15
minutes time. The scores into it look
like this on the S&P 500. Not far off
alltime highs. We're down a tenth of 1%
this afternoon. In the bond market,
twos, tens, and 30s shaping up as
follows. Your bond curve looks like
this. Yields high by four basis points
to the front end. 354. We have rallied a
lot at both the front and the long end
over the past 6 weeks.
>> Yeah. And we've seen even a rally in
credit just to give you a space a sense
of just how much 10-year yields have
rallied. They are down uh from 4.37%
as of July 30 at the last Fed meeting.
They are now at 4.03%. Just giving you a
sense of that momentum.
>> A couple days ago we popped 399 in the
tenure and this morning we made a dash
toward just for a cup of sanka. But the
the answer is yield space is moving.
Greg Peters is exhausted.
>> Go further out. Go to 30s. Only a few
weeks back we're at about five. Yeah.
>> Come all the way back down towards 4 and
a half%. And the way the curve has
evolved through August into September.
August we had a bull steepener. Big
rally at the front end. September it's
been completely the opposite. We've had
a bull flattener led by the long end.
>> And the reason for it has been different
depending on the person you've spoken
to. Some people say it's because of the
threat of yield curve control or some
sort of minations in the balance sheet.
Other people saying, "Look, if you have
all these people in cash, you cut rates,
well, they want to lock in that yield,
so they're going to go out the curve."
That's a new argument and we're hearing
it more.
>> Joining us now to discuss Kathy Jones of
Char Swap, Greg Peters of Pentium Fixed
Income still with us. Kathy, let's start
with expectations. What are you
expecting in about 13 minutes time?
>> Yeah, we're looking for 25, which is the
consensus. You know, I guess there's an
off chance it'll be 50, but given that
inflation is still pretty high, um I
think it's going to be difficult to have
a really aggressive rate cut at this
stage of the game, even though the labor
market showing signs of deterioration.
You know, an unemployment rate in the
low fours is still not that far from
what's considered full employment. And
then you've got inflation at threeish
and edging higher. I get it's very
difficult to make the case for 50 in
this environment unless you have a
really negative view of where the labor
market's going.
>> Given that backdrop, Kathy, why do you
think there's been such a rally in the
long end of the yield curve since the
last Fed meeting?
Well, you know, we we've had the rally
because, you know, the expectation we've
had weak economic data and we have a
greater expectation for rate cuts and
so, you know, the market has a lot of
rate cuts built into it out to 2027.
So, the long end's been pulled down by
that. But I would I would point out that
the curve is still steep and steepening.
We're we're still we're still looking at
a steeper curve as we go forward. even
um you know even if it's somewhat lower
rates uh I don't know that the long end
can kind of get out of its way if we
still have inflation pushing higher and
the dynamics behind inflation are still
not great.
>> Kathy, what's your action plan to put
cash to work? I understand we're before
the meeting. Let's go after the meeting,
but let's take it out to into next year
as well. What's the Kathy Jones action
plan given Fed chaos?
Well, we're hoping people aren't too
heavily in cash at this stage of the
game because we've been encouraging them
to be intermediate term on the curve and
up in credit quality. Um, and I I think
that that is still our plan. You know,
we'll see how Fed policy evolves. We'll
see how the economy evolves, but we're
really looking for a fair amount of
volatility going forward. There's a lot
of things on the horizon policy-wise
that can shake up the market. So, we
don't want to go super long and but we
don't want to sit in cash because I
think the bias is still to cut rates.
>> Greg Peters, let's get to you on some of
this. Why is so many people so
comfortable just sitting and waiting in
the belly of the curve
>> because they're positive carry, right?
Positive carry and roll. It's the bond
bond investors dream. Um and so you look
at just the level of yields, the
steepness of the curve, it's uh you
know, it's a very good, you know,
environment for just just being in
bonds. And I would say that's a global
story, just not a US story. So um I
don't think uh the bond quote unquote
bull market goes away. I think it's a
very robust uh environment for bonds.
One point I want to just make though
just on volatility. Sure. What's really
important to watch uh is the trend in
volatility. Typically what you see as
the Fed enters the easing cycle,
volatility broadly comes down. It pulls
pulls volatility down. So if you
actually see V actually move higher in
this rate easing cycle, that could be a
sign that there's concerns around, you
know, Fed independence, you know, risk
around u uh the economy, all these other
types of things. So So it's something to
watch for. It sounds like an arcane part
of the market, but it's a really
important one to uh get a view into.
Greg, how crowded is the uh long bond
right now? The shorts were pretty
crowded and they got stopped out and
that was probably a significant part of
it at this point. How balanced is
positioning?
>> Yeah, so positioning is much more
balanced. So, you're quite right. The uh
the move was around positioning, right?
I think at the end of the day, we we're
fitting a narrative to uh to the
positioning trade more than anything
else. Uh uh but the positioning side is
much cleaner. Um as a consequence I
think there's uh room again for the
curve to kind of gently reepen here. Uh
uh uh but you know positioning has
played a part. It will continue to play
a part. Um and so this is you know how
we invest these days.
>> Kathy Jones, are you writing a strategy
as a Fed cut is a one-off or is a series
of rate cuts on the edge of Greenspan?
What strategy are you writing right now?
Yeah, we do think there'll be a series
of rate cuts, but we're not expecting
the cycle, so much as we can tell at
this moment in time, to be as deep as
the market has priced in. So, and that's
because our view on inflation is that
it's it's going to remain stubborn
because of tariffs, because of
immigration policy, you know, you name
it, there are a number of reasons. And
so we're looking at a series of rate
cuts, but not as deep as what the market
has priced in. Another reason we're
being kind of cautious and anticipating
volatility is because we think the
market's gotten pretty far ahead of
where the Fed is likely to go. And then
you add in all the uncertainty about
who's running policy at the Fed and the
future and you know it becomes a a stew
pot of uh factors that could cause ball
to pick up.
>> And this is something Brian Moan was
essentially alluding to earlier on this
morning that in 2026 you could have a
sticky inflation story that may
constrain that easing bias at the
Federal Reserve.
>> Yeah. speaking not only to Brian Moyahan
but all of the people under him and the
acceleration you're seeing in consumer
spending and then speaking to Scott
Kirby over at United and hearing the
same thing this reaceleration in
consumer spending. It doesn't scream
some sort of slowdown or recessionary
condition.
>> They're talking about resilience. We're
talking about an equity market near
all-time highs, investment grade credit
spreads near multi-deade tights. And yet
we're having a conversation about
whether this Fed in 7 minutes time will
cut interest rates by 25 basis points or
50. Sabbatra Shapper of Soggen is with
us now for more. Sabbatra, I want to get
to you on that. The 50 basis point view.
Is that what you and the team are
looking for and ultimately why?
So I think the spirit of the call from
our economists is the fact that given
the information we have on the job
market and the revisions quite dramatic.
Uh the Fed has some catching up to do.
So the idea is that the Fed is going to
have to frontload some of these cuts
between now and the end of the year. So
whether it's a 50 basis point cut at the
September meeting and then another 25
basis point cut or a series of 25 basis
point cuts, these cuts coming earlier
and and sooner makes a lot more sense
given the fact that we now know that
there's a decent amount of weakness in
the labor market. You know that said I
mean you know I am sympathetic to the
market pricing of cuts which is calling
for uh you know three cuts but kind of
more spread out as opposed to 50 basis
points at the September meeting. The
data especially recent data the retail
sales uh data has been very strong and
outside of the of the labor market uh
you know most of the other data points
that we've gotten ISMs etc have also
been somewhat on surprising to the
upside.
Given the fact that, you know, the
economy is in a relatively good spot,
the Fed does have a little bit of luxury
in spreading out those cuts.
>> So, you're talking about the evening
special on Sunday on uh C-SPAN. We want
to talk about the B movie, at least as
Greg Peters was talking about earlier,
the sort of drama in the background. In
other words, to put it bluntly, how much
does it really matter to you as a bond
strategist what Stephen Meer says given
that he is a new governor and he has the
full backing of the president?
It it does matter. I think words do
matter. I think the fact that if you you
know, at least optically when you have
maybe three governors dissenting for the
first time since the late 80s, I think
that that's really going to to stand
out. And and what would be interesting
is if you actually have descents on the
hawkish side, and that'll really make
the meeting very colorful. I mean, if I
could, I'd love to be a fly in the wall
in these discussions over the last
couple of of days. But again, I think
that these uh these statements and
sentiments do car carry value. I think
broadly speaking, I think that's what
the market's trying to sus out as well
because if you if you look into the end
of next year, you're looking at, you
know, pretty decent amount of cuts being
priced in. So, the market is assigning a
higher probability for a much more
doubbish uh, you know, Fed committee,
FOMC committee next year. So Badra,
society general is a Paris bank in a
nation in a complete total uproar. We
all know the French story, the politics
in all. This Fed meeting is invaded by
politics. Does Jerome Powell have to
speak to the nonfinancial America out
there?
>> Yeah, he always does. I think that the
messaging has always been very clear and
and simple. They do look at policy for
all Americans, all sectors of the
economy. they are going to take into
account that there are certain sectors
of the economy that are particularly
coming under uh you know pressure
especially if you look at you know the
employment side of the picture uh you we
still have halves and have nots economy
so Paul I think is going to be very very
focused on trying to to keep basically
all constituents of the of the economy
in mind while changing policy and that's
part of the reason why I think it makes
sense for them to frontload cuts uh you
know this year
>> Kathy four minutes less than four
minutes until we get that decision. If
you were in the press conference, what
would your one question be to Fed Chair
Jay Powell, if you had one?
>> Well, I'm going to assume that whoever
went before me asked about uh squaring
up the, you know, the dual mandate with
the rate cut. And I would go on to ask a
bit more about the concept of maturity
matching on the balance sheet. This is
something uh Governor Waller has talked
about and I think Steven Myron might uh
embrace as well and I think that that
has some implications longer term uh for
how the Fed proceeds and how the market
develops. So I would uh definitely ask
that question if I had the chance.
>> Balance sheet management Bremo keeps
coming up, doesn't it? Yield curve
control, right? All of these things,
these questions keep coming up.
>> Yield curve control under another name.
I mean people start tuning out and they
hear you know tweaking the balance sheet
and maturity matching that is another
way of backdoor yield curve control that
a lot of people are trying to
understand.
>> Kathy Jones of charge swap satra zapper
of sog to the both of you. Thank you.
That decision is about 2 minutes and 30
seconds away. We've talked about this
three-part act. We got a statement the
forecast and news conference. Let's just
sit on the forecast. The Federal Reserve
has to project and forecast not payrolls
but unemployment. And going into this, I
wonder if we're going to be surprised
more by how much the SCP changes or by
how much the SEP actually remains the
same. How much can these forecasts
around things like unemployment for
inflation actually change? And that's
what's interesting about the moment.
Typically, when the Fed is projecting
more interest rate cuts, you'd expect a
big downgrade to growth. You'd also
expect an upgrade to unemployment. We
might not get that in 2 minutes time,
>> especially given the fact that we're at
a pretty neutral pace. Just taking a
look at where we were, the projection
was for 4 and a.5% at the end of this
year in terms of an unemployment rate
and a 3.1% core PCE. It wasn't expected
to shift that much on either front over
the following couple of years.
>> John, I think what you bring up is a
really really important point. Uh what
confidence do we have in our guests out
to June of next year, December? Liz Anne
Saunders had the map of the day. It was
household insurance across America. Let
me tell you, half of America's flat on
their back with fixed costs surging.
>> This is the question I think for the
committee today and for the news
conference too for Chairman Pal. And
there was a key difference between how
he addressed this question in July and
how he's thinking about it over at
Jackson Hole in August. What is
anchoring your view on the labor market
right now? Is it the unemployment rate?
Is it measures of slack? Or is it
payroll growth? because the chairman pal
of July was very different to the
chairman pal of August
>> who said that it was really important
back in July to look at the unemployment
rate and then the payroll's headline
figure. The problem is right now people
really dispute the idea that we have the
same kind of labor market that requires
the 150 200,000 jobs created per month
and that this is more of a 50,000 a
month kind of break even rate that we
should be looking at. Do you get lulled
into a bigger conversation, a bigger
decision than you otherwise would have
made? And that's something that this
Federal Reserve has to confront today
and for the next several months. That
decision is 20 seconds away. The
question is not if they'll cut interest
rates. The question is by how much, 25
or 50. And how much can you project in
the guidance, the forecast? Equities
going into it just about unchanged on
the S&P 500. In the bond market, twos,
tens, 30s look like this. your 2-year
bond yield up by three basis points with
your Fed decision. Here is Mike McKe.
>> The answer to your question, John, is a
quarter percentage point cut as
expected, but Fed officials also see two
more cuts this year in October and
December. According to the new dot plot,
there was one descent and that is from
Steven Myron, the Trump representative
on the board who wanted no cuts this
time. They wanted rather two cuts this
time, 50 basis points. Next year, the
committee sees only one cut so far, but
the dispersion is very wide and the very
bottom dot for next year is at 2.75%
suggesting once again that is Steven
Myron. The committee sees that the risks
to the the that they are attentive to
the risks of both sides of their
mandate, but they say the risks to the
downside for unemployment have
increased. And that's the reason that
they are cutting rates today. They also
adjust the forward guidance in the
statement to drop the word extent and
just say in considering additional
changes to the uh target range in the
future, they will consider all kinds of
options. There is no real change to
their economic forecasts, but we don't
know exactly why that is. Whether it's
because Myron contributed different
numbers than others or Anna Pollson, the
new Philadelphia Fed president
contributed different uh numbers than
others, but the growth rate is marked up
for this year to 1.6% from 1.4%
and the unemployment rate is unchanged
at 4.5%. PCE inflation at 3% is
unchanged from their July forecast and
core PCE inflation unchanged at 3.1%.
There's no change overall to the balance
sheet. And once again, there was one
descent. Steven Myron, the new member of
the board from the Trump administration.
The rest of the board, including Mickey
Bowman and Chris Waller, satisfied with
moving the rate down to the range of
four to four and a quarter%.
>> Mike McKe, thank you, sir. Stay close.
We'll take some time to internalize what
we've just heard from the Federal
Reserve. A lot of information. Equities
off the back of it. Still just about
positive by a tenth of 1% in the bond
market. Yields just a little bit lower
at the front end of the curve. Down by
two basis points on twos to 348. And
foreign exchange some euro strength,
some dollar weakness. We approach 119 on
Euro dollar which is its own story which
we'll get to later. 11884. Want to do a
couple of things. Let's take the
forecast and just focus on 2025 and
2026. And I just want to focus on where
the projections were in June and where
they are now. And just go through this
piece by piece. For GDP compared to
June, that's an upgrade for this year
and for next year. For the median dot,
we've gone from 39 in June down to 36
for now. So we're looking for another
two cuts. For next year, we've come down
from 36 to 34. And PCE has remained
pretty stable, I've got to say, for this
year. For next year, they're looking
that around 2.6% 6% up from 2.4. So just
get into this a little bit more. What an
odd decision we've got here. Bremo that
this Federal Reserve and you don't
usually see this has cut interest rates
by 25 basis points has increased by just
one interest rate cut relative to where
we were in June for this year. At the
same time they've upgraded growth, kept
unemployment basically unchanged and
basically projecting CPI to be sticky
and close to 3%. and saying in their
statement that inflation has moved up
and remains somewhat elevated as their
SCP their statement of economic
projections suggests. So then why is the
bond market rallying? Why are yields
down even at the long end if this is
basically the uh projection that
inflation will remain high and they will
cut into that inflation? And what this
hints at, and this I think is really
going to be interesting, is uh this
clear desire by the Federal Reserve to
overweight the economy, even allowing
inflation to run hot and they will keep
cutting despite that inflation. That is
what is getting translated into this
market.
>> Want to cross back over to Mike McKe if
he's still with us and hasn't run off to
the news conference just yet. Is Mike
there good? Mike, I want to come back to
you. How original is to see this to see
a rate cut to see the projection of more
to come at the same time all these other
things are happening with the forecast.
How can you explain that?
>> Well, I think there's two possibilities
and they both center around the new
members on the board and a pollson from
the Philadelphia Fed and most probably
Steven. When you look at the range of
the forecasts for GDP, they moved up the
bottom range and the top range and the
same is true with the unemployment rate.
It didn't move at all, but inflation
didn't move. And it seems that Myron
probably put in stronger growth, lower
unemployment, and at least unchanged or
lower inflation going forward. And that
probably accounts for the changes in the
forecast. What's really interesting is
the wide dispersion in 2026 dots.
There's clearly no consensus yet on how
many rate cuts they're going to want to
see, except uh Mr. Myron thinks rates
will go down to the 2 and a half to 2%
range.
>> Mike, I know you've got to run, but when
you go into that news conference, you're
starting to think about questions
already. What do you want to know from
Chairman Pal?
>> Well, I think you guys were phrasing it
well there in your reaction. If
inflation isn't going down, then why are
you cutting rates is sort of a basic
fundamental question here.
>> Mike McKe with the latest. You get ahead
to that news conference. It starts in
about 25 minutes time. So, we got 25.
The Federal Reserve ultimately met the
market for 2025. 2026 is a little bit
more interesting because this market bra
as you know is much more aggressive on
rate cuts for next year than this
Federal Reserve based on based on the
median dot in the Federal Reserve's
projection because as Mike McKe just
indicated the dispersion which is
something you talked about the spread of
the dots for next year is incredibly
wide
>> and it makes one wonder if a certain dot
has a greater weight than other dots
given the fact that the market is moving
on the idea of more cuts even though
some of The other dots suggested only
two cuts this year and relatively few
next year. And the statement of economic
projections talks about uh a Fed funds
rate that ends next year well above 3%.
We are now below that in the futures
market.
>> Something you're interesting. You got a
median, you got a central tendency, you
got a home in the range and all that.
Guess what? There's not a median
statistic here above 2%. Is sub 2%
economic growth politically acceptable
coming up on an election in 2026? I
don't think so.
>> The answer to that is no. Which is
>> why the edge of Europe is what I'm
looking at here.
>> To your point, TK, which is why this
administration would like this Federal
Reserve
>> to be a lot more aggressive than these
dots would imply,
>> which is the reason why the market is
hearing exactly what you're pointing out
that that is not an acceptable kind of
reality. And that's why I think it'll be
very interesting to see how Fed Chair
Powell really gets behind this.
>> Greg Peters, you're following the story
as it evolves. What's your initial
takeaway? Yeah. So the initial takeaway
is uh definitely prioritizing growth. Um
not surprised uh that um you know my was
you know far a field. Uh I am surprised
uh by only one descent though uh what I
think most people thought myself
included you'd have three. But I think
the question that we're not asking is uh
inflation itself. So it's embedded in
that forecast is it's still a I'm sorry
to say transitory uh inflation component
driven by tariffs that roll off over
time. Um uh and so if indeed that is
factoring in to the Fed, you know,
forward thinking uh then that does mean
there's more room for cuts because
they're not as worried about that
inflation component. So So I would just
be hesitant to look at the inflation
number uh uh in an abstract. I think
what's driving it underneath is the key.
>> To your point, there is a very clean,
dare I say, convenient glide path back
down to 2% in the forecast from 3-1 for
this year, 26 for next, 2-1 after that,
down to two for core PCE.
>> Yeah, there's a big rebuttal on that and
that is in the dollar and I you
mentioned this earlier and the idea that
long-term bonds yields are falling.
You're seeing a rally across the board
in everything but the dollar, which just
hit the lowest levels going back for the
entirety of this year. That is speaking
volumes about exactly what you just
pointed to.
>> We just took out 119 on Euro dollar.
Let's head over to Europe and catch up
with Bob Michael at JP Morgan in the
heart of foreign exchange in the city of
London. Bob, great to get your thoughts.
You've had about 8 minutes to go over
this one. What jumps out to you, sir?
>> Couple things jump out. Uh Greg's right.
One descent was surprising. Uh we
certainly thought there would be three
pushing for 50 basis point rate cuts and
possibly two uh suggesting nothing. And
then also the fact that two rate cuts
were pulled forward into this year. We
thought there would just be one more for
this year. Um so more or less uh where
we were last time. It tells me that this
is a Fed that locked arms felt this was
time to reduce policy. what from what
was surprisingly restrictive to them.
They were probably shaken by the labor
market revisions and thought, "Wow,
we've kept policy a lot more restrictive
than we thought. Let's start getting to
neutral." Um, and let's do it in unified
fashion. I think this is good for the
markets,
>> Bob. Good for the markets. Let's talk
about which ones. It might be good for
risk assets. How much can this keep
being supportive for long-term bonds
given that theoretically higher
inflation would come on the heels of of
a prioritization of growth and typically
higher inflation is bad for long-term
bonds?
Well, I I wonder if the indication of
higher inflation is just a suggestion to
us not to expect uh 50 basis point rate
cuts in here, but 25 uh perhaps every
meeting for the next few meetings. Uh
maybe they don't get down to 3% right
away. They pause somewhere around three
and a half either side of that. Um I get
that. I'm sort of with the Fed. We don't
really know the shape of inflation until
we see the final shape of tariffs. Right
now, the evidence is pretty good.
Businesses have absorbed some of it and
the consumer hasn't really pushed back
all that much and there's been signs of
disinflation. So, I'm not that concerned
about inflation.
>> Bob, your colleague Michael Foli made
global headlines a long time ago talking
about a sub 2% potential GDP. Without
COVID, try stimulus and all the rest and
the legislation. these median growth
estimates today. Do we have to get used
to this sub 2% real GDP?
>> It doesn't feel like we're going to have
to get used to it. It feels like we live
in a world where policy will be generous
on the accommodative side, both fiscal
and monetary. Um, we're looking at dots
now, but we also haven't weighed in.
Forget about tariffs. the one big
beautiful bill act that starts to hit in
earnest in the first quarter. So I
wouldn't be surprised to see GDP
estimates go up next year.
>> For those of you just tuning in about 10
minutes ago, 11 minutes ago, the Federal
Reserve made the decision to cut
interest rates by 25 basis points. There
was one descent, an individual looking
for a 50 basis point cut. That was the
newly minted Governor Myron sent over
from the White House at the Federal
Reserve. I want to get to something, TK.
Check this out.
>> Go to the dot plot and the projections.
And if you go to the dot plot and you
look at 2025, there is a very lonely dot
at the very bottom of the screen and
it's sub 3% not for next year but for
this year there is a dot there just
below 3% for 2025. Now we were all
asking and of course when you follow
those things there are no names on the
dots. You don't know who they belong to
but I think we've got a pretty good idea
who this might have come from. We've
been asking how aggressive Governor
Myron might be. That a Senate is one
story. the push for a whole lot more for
the year ahead.
>> You mean 125 basis points of rate cuts
by the end of this year seems a little
bit aggressive. Look, to me that is
notable and it might be uh exceptional
for people to hear that and absurd if
you think about the uh the growth in the
economy and yet how much is the market
trading off this and I wonder how much
does this have disproportionate weight
in the market because this is someone
who really is coming with the backing of
the president and could be some sort of
signification of who he might pick next
year. I can see this picture out the
corner of my eye. So, let's take this
picture and for our audience at home,
I'm just going to articulate what we see
on the screen right now. So, you've got
this lonely dot for 2025 and then in
2026, you've got this additional story
to think about this massive spread in
expectations from individual policy
makers of the Federal Reserve. Lisa,
they have got absolutely no idea correct
what 26 brings, what 27 brings. This is
a low conviction Federal Reserve and
you've got to bear that in mind when you
go into this news conference. These guys
are not gods. They haven't got crystal
balls. They are clueless going into next
year.
>> We're all clueless. And when we were
speaking today to some of the heads of
retail banking, what we have seen is
retailers themselves don't know how much
they can pass along inflation, how much
there will be this elasticity in terms
of demand.
>> Greg Peters is not clueless. I'm looking
at the Bloomberg total return corporate
index and it is a miracle price up and
yield down. Do you predict that we will
see these acclaimed indices the Lehman
Barclays etc. Now the Bloomberg total
return index they're going to break
through and go through the highs of
precoid I mean we can have a a new low
yield regime that we we just think
didn't think would occur.
>> I don't think so. I I I think that's
heroic. I think the world has changed
postcoid. I think the environment of
zero interest rates, negative interest
rates will continue to be looked back on
as a bad idea. Um, that drove those
rates to those levels. So, I don't
>> Can we go on the edge of my I guess
that's the question. Can we find that
dot?
>> I don't think you can get there without
a recession, honestly. Um, and I think
it's important to remember, you know,
the starting place is above neutral,
right? So, we're not even at the top of
neutral yet. So, um, you know, the the
Fed still has room. They still can get
to 4% and and and you know, they're
neutral, right? And and and so we have a
long way to go. As you get much lower
though, that's where things become
really quite accommodative. And I think
that's a different question. So, I think
we're all kind of hot and bothered by
this move, but the truth of the matter
is we're not in neutral territory yet.
In some ways, this was the easy decision
and every decision after this gets a
little bit harder. In equities right now
this afternoon, equities rolling over on
the S&P 500. So, negative now by about a
quarter of 1%. Check out the Russell up
by 1.24%. The rally for small caps
continues. Bond yields still a little
bit lower at the front end, lower at the
long end. 30s are down by three basis
points. Twos are down by almost two
basis points. We've got Bob Michael at
JP Morgan still with us. Bob, we want to
come back to you. You've just heard from
the Federal Reserve and I don't know
what we get in the news conference, but
let's just go with what they've told us
so far. They're telling us we can
upgrade growth, not bring down the
projections for inflation, and
ultimately offer you more rate cuts. How
bullish does that make you as a bond
investor?
>> Aren't they magical? It's all dependent
on their policy. If they bring rates
down to where they say they're going,
they think they are going to cause
greater growth and maintain stable
inflation. Um, look, I I think there are
so many policies in flux on the fiscal
side that we don't know yet. I think
what we do know is that the labor market
was starting to struggle by a greater
degree than we all had thought. And we
saw that revision and went, uh, and it's
time to start relieving some of the
pressure on corporate America. Now,
>> Jon, it's 216. We've yet to mention
tariffs. I find that extraordinary. So,
I'm pleased you've brought this up, TK,
because I think still a lot of people
are talking about the tariffs of April
as an event and not a process. And I
think it's far more important to be
open-minded about the process and the
potential of pass through still to come.
We know based on the data so far that we
aren't seeing the exporters drop prices
aggressively. You can see that in import
prices. We know based on the data so far
that a lot of companies domestically are
absorbing this on margin,
>> right? What we don't know is whether
they pass on those costs in the next
several months and change this inflation
picture.
>> Exactly. And when I look at the Excel
spreadsheet from the Fed here and the
sub 2% growth, my question is are we
seeing a decline in purchasing power and
that's why you see you know the curve
coming down and and yields coming down.
Right now
>> I think what we've seen Tom without a
doubt is that we've seen a massive step
down in payroll growth.
>> Yeah.
>> That has clearly spooked some members of
this Federal Reserve. But Lisa, I think
it's key to point out not all members of
this Federal Reserve. There's some
members of this Fed will still be
anchoring their labor market view around
what's happening with unemployment,
which has been pretty stable through all
of this, through the whole of this
summer. And look at the forecast from
the Fed. They're still forecasting
pretty stable unemployment around 4 and
a.5%.
>> Yeah. which is the dispersion and going
back to that is the reason why I'm
struggling to interpret the move in
markets right now because is the market
taking their guidance on my or on the
idea that there are Fed officials who
are pushing back and saying actually we
need to be tighter right now is this a
trial balloon for what it would be if
there was a Fed that was being more
aggressive or are we not there yet? I
mean that I think is going to be a tell
in terms of does the bond market behave
if it believes that a Fed is willing to
really prioritize growth in a
significant way over inflation.
>> Hey Bob, good to catch up as always. Bob
Michael there of JP Morgan. Lisa, let's
turn to Dian Swunk of KPMG. She's
standing by. Dan, welcome to the
program. So much the process here going
into this news conference in about 12
minutes time. What's your number one
issue going into the press up?
Well, first of all, it's really clear
that Powell coralled the cats. And I
assume that Waller and Bowman did not
descent in part because of the strong
retail sales data, which also revealed
inequality. And something else that's
going on out there, and that is that
spending on restaurants went up after
adjusting for inflation. Spending at
grocery stores actually fell after um
adjusting for inflation and the retail
sales numbers. And so you've got this
sort of, you know, the K-shaped economy.
We keep talking about the bifurcation,
but that masking the underlying weakness
in lower and middle inome households. So
this was clearly an acknowledgement that
yes, the labor market has weakened and
they want to shore up the labor market.
What surprised me as well was that we
had heard the Fed talk about a reduction
in what they thought the neutral rate
was. Powell had referred to that that
there had been some discussion about
that in previous meetings that did not
show up in the forecast and I think
that's important as well because they're
removing restriction now. It's not just
calibrating down because the neutral
rate has moved down. They're trying to
say listen we're removing some
restriction acknowledging the weakness
in the labor market. want to sharp up
the labor market. But if you really do
read this sort of through to next year
with a major change in leadership at the
Fed, you could have a situation where
you overstimulate and get a more
pernicious and self-fulfilling prophecy
on the fact that consumers and firms now
expect inflation to be higher. And I
think what the Fed is struggling with is
that consumers are also telling them in
their own surveys that the job market's
the worst it's been. um on record since
2013. That's something that has got to
have startled the Fed as well.
>> Diane, this is without a doubt a very
confusing economic time. It's also a
very confusing time when it comes to the
Fed's reaction function. Do you have a
clear sense of how the Fed is going to
prioritize incoming data, whether it's
retail sales or jobless claims or
whether it's the payrolls report, and
decide how much to ease.
It's really hard. This is, you know,
it's one thing for the Fed to have
forecast the stagflationary mild bout of
stagflation that they did since March
that's gotten more stagflationary over
time. Um, that was hard to forecast.
It's another thing to live it in real
time. And that's what we're doing. And
unfortunately, um, it is very hard to
not you have to shore up the labor
market a bit. That said, you don't want
to remove so much accommodation that you
allow these waves as as um we heard
earlier. I mean, the idea that these are
an uneven roll out of tariffs. So, it's
not just one and done. And Powell was
careful in his Jackson Hall remarks on
that too. It's not all at once. It's
coming in waves. That reinforces the
idea that we're going to normalize
inflation, which becomes its own
self-fulfilling prophecy. And the Fed
really has to be quite cognizant of
that. And Diane, you own the study of
Michigan, Chicago, and down south down
the Mississippi River. The mail I get is
people are flat on their back in this
K-shaped economy. How does Jerome Powell
address the have nots of America? They
don't have AI. They didn't buy Nvidia
like John three years ago. How what do
we do with the people that aren't
participating in the system?
>> Well, it's actually it's it's really the
inequality is getting worse. We know
that um actually Moody's just came out
with an updated estimate on some of the
inequality and you know the top 3.3% of
households are really um doing really
really well. Um the top 20% a little bit
better in terms of gaining spending
since 21 relative to inflation. The rest
of the economy the bottom 80% pretty
much flatlining it since um after
adjusting for inflation on their
spending patterns. That's a really tough
position to be in. And it gets to the
heart of what we're still dealing with
is the embers of the pandemic inflation
we're still smoldering when you added on
the tariff induced increases in prices.
And that's what's really tough for the
Fed to deal with and for the average
American because remember even when the
labor market was much more robust when
inflation flared the majority of
Americans believed we were in a
recession because their purchasing power
was eroding and they were losing ground.
And I think that's very important
because it really gets to the corrosive
nature of inflation. And at the end of
the day, you cannot get full employment
sustained unless you really derail
inflation. What we don't know is if this
will just be a couple steps up and then
just come off or if it will be more um
persistent. And that's what he's going
to have to emphasize at the press
conference today is that they're going
to be mindful to watch what's coming on
in terms of how persistent the inflation
becomes and how much inflation
expectations to get jargony get unmed
>> Nvidia that's my biggest position TK at
hindsight capital
>> you killed it
>> I wish you just killed it
>> Dian Swank of KPMG Diane thank you
appreciate it Matt Lazellia Deutsche
Bank standing by Matt welcome to the
program what an interesting forecast mix
more rate cuts in our future. Growth
apparently okay unemployment not a
problem. Explain that one, Matt.
>> Yeah, I think for the near-term uh it's
pretty clear. They they talked about uh
increased downside risk to the labor
market. And so this is all about risk
management. It's not about modal
forecasts at all. As you noted, growth
is stronger, the unemployment rate
unchanged for this year, inflation
unchanged for this year. You can see it
at the back of the FCP their forecast.
There was a little bit of a shift in the
distribution of risks. those officials
that are more worried about downside
risk to the labor market, less officials
that are are more worried about upside
risk to to inflation. Uh it's basically
in line with what we were anticipating
the Fed shifting in a little bit more
dovish direction today. Close call on
the two versus three dots. I think the
key question for Chair Pal is how much
does he lean into the near-term signal
of cutting out each meeting uh this
year?
>> Do you get a sense uh Matt of how much
the reaction function has shifted?
John's done a really great job of
talking about how from July to August
there seemed to be a shift from the
unemployment rate to the headlines
payrolls report. Do you have a sense of
just how tolerant this Fed is going to
be of inflation well above 2% for years
on end and keep cutting?
>> Look, I think they're showing us that
they're pretty tolerant about of above
target inflation. Uh in fact, if you
look at their forecast for next year,
they actually raised their inflation
forecast by 210. They raised their
growth forecast. They lowered their
unemployment rate forecast. And yet we
see a lower Fed funds rate. I think the
reality is we are now projecting at at
five plus years of inflation being at
least at least 50 basis points above
their target. And yet they are cutting
rates into that environment. So I think
it's a Fed where you know as long as
there are no worries about the labor
market, they can be hyperfocused on
inflation. But once some of those
concerns about the the labor market
really manifest, you see a pretty dove
shift. Then I think that's what we saw
from chair pal at Jackson Hole and we're
seeing it manifested now through the dot
plot.
>> Uh Matt Lazoti, Dian Swank brought it up
and many others have as well. We're all
focused on tariffs and substitution. Are
we seeing a decline in purchasing power
here? Is there an income effect from
tariffs that the Fed has to fold in and
what is this John? 50 more beeps are
going to do by the end of the year
>> potentially. Yeah. You know, wide spread
of estimates win one of them. I know
>> 125. The
>> TK spurs are doing all right.
>> Yeah, they are. Is it just Matt
purchasing power here? This is a huge
issue for Americans, isn't it?
>> It is, no doubt. Um, but you know, I
think that the the main area where you
would first see that is through consumer
spending data. And I take Dian's point
and and the points earlier that there's
great dispersion around that data. Um,
you know, with with that being driven by
higher income households. Uh, at the
same time, uh, GDP growth is tracking
above 3% in Q3. It was above 3% in Q2.
retail sales are robust, capex growth
was strong. So I think it's a Fed where
um you know even if you are seeing it uh
eat into disposable income growth,
consumer spending growth in the
aggregate is strong and monetary policy
has one blunt tool which is the Fed
funds rate. Um so really they you know
they're they're not apt or really able
to get at a lot of those distributional
issues. I think you know chair pal and
the fed would probably tell you that
that is more up to uh fiscal policy uh
tax and spending policies that we would
see from the administration. So I don't
think that this is really about uh
trying to alleviate some of those
distributional concerns. I think it's
concerns about the the aggregate labor
market um which is not being manifested
in strong growth at this point in time
and then just trying to get ahead of it
and taking out some insurance against
that.
>> Matt Lazadi, appreciate it. One of the
best Matt, thank you sir. Matt Lazi
there of Deutsche Bank the news
conference a few minutes away. We often
hear people come on the program and say,
"I expect it to be doubbish." And really
the response to that should always be
doubbish to what? Relevant to what?
Relative to who and what and where.
Relative to the market, this isn't
doubbish. Of course, we were looking for
really bullish expectation for rate cuts
in the next 12 months or so. But it's
their own forecast that make this
doubbish. The fact that the Federal
Reserve is coming out and telling you,
you know what, Lisa, next year I expect
a better picture for growth. I expect a
slightly higher inflation print than we
did a few months ago. But you know what?
I give you some rate cuts in a mix as
well. That's basically what the Federal
Reserve has communicated in these
forecasts today.
>> Yeah. And the currency markets are
hearing that loud and clear and I think
that that is the biggest tell and I keep
going back to that with the Bloomberg
dollar spot index now at a new post2022
low. We have seen it completely weaken
fall versus some of its counterparts.
Why? Because of this prioritization of
growth over inflation by the FOMC and a
reiter a reiterization of that in this
uh SCP. Greg, I got to ask you a basic
question. You've been doing this for a
few years. When you read sellside
literature right now, economic think
tank literature. Can you trust the
forecasts?
>> Well, yes. I mean, I think forecasts are
always fraught. Uh the dot plot is no
different than a sellside forecast that
it's not like they come with any
additional information. Uh but I think
in this particular period when there's
so much going on and I hate the word
uncertainty, but it is the right word. I
mean, you know, we've been talking about
tariffs as an example. We have a Supreme
Court decision coming. We don't know
what the shape of tariffs is going to
look like after that, just as one
example. So, so it's a really difficult
environment. So, you should expect to
see more dispersion.
Uh uh what the markets are trying to sus
out, what I'm trying to sus out is
what's what's real and what's political.
Um and um and I think that's an open
question and time will tell on that
front.
>> Is the political real? Well, political
is driving the real
>> they're going to be the same thing next
year, aren't they?
>> Yeah. No. No. Absolutely. And I think
this is the world or this is the uh
investment realm that we have to deal
with. Uh and so it's not going to change
anytime soon. But this was an incredibly
dovish uh uh seap and dot plot. Um and
you know, the markets aren't responding
in kind.
>> We don't know for sure who's that dot
who that dot actually belongs to at the
Federal Reserve. You can have a decent
guess. Sure. They're not going to tell
us. But here's my point. Well, I bet you
$10.
>> It would be a mistake, I think, to say
that's Governor Myron. It does not
matter. Isn't that a hint, a flavor of
what could be coming further down the
line in 2026? Isn't that ultimately what
the Fed share dot could look like in the
next 12 months. This is the reason why I
do believe based on the market activity,
people are putting a disproportional
amount of weight on that dot and on the
view on the disscent because it is a
flavor of who that new Fed chair could
be.
>> We're close to Paul coming out as quick
as I can. The markets will police the
politicians in Washington.
>> TK, you say that.
>> Look at what this Fed's just done. It's
revised Harris inflation forecast and
just cut rates.
>> But we are, as he correctly said, Greg
said, we're above the neutral rate
substantially. They got wiggle room
here.
>> This decision is the easier decision.
Without a doubt, we're on the same page
on that front. But if anything, you
could talk about this Federal Reserve
falling into the hands of political
actors. This Federal Reserve hasn't hit
his inflation mark for years, led by the
chairman of the Federal Reserve, Jay
Pal, who stepped into the room. Let's
take a listen to the chairman of the
Federal Reserve.
Good afternoon.
My colleagues and I remain squarely
focused on achieving our dual mandate
goals of maximum employment and stable
prices for the benefit of the American
people. While the unemployment rate
remains low, it has edged up. Job gains
have slowed and downside risks to
employment have risen. At the same time,
inflation has risen recently and remains
somewhat elevated.
In support of our goals and in light of
the shift in the balance of risks today,
the Federal Open Market Committee
decided to lower our policy interest
rate by a quarter percentage point. We
also decided to continue to reduce our
securities holdings. I'll have more to
say about monetary policy after briefly
reviewing economic developments.
Recent indicators suggest that growth of
economic activity has moderated. GDP
growth. GDP rose at a pace of around one
and a half percent in the first half of
the year, down from 2.5% last year. The
moderation in growth largely reflects a
slowdown in consumer spending.
In contrast, business investment in
equipment and intangibles has picked up
from last year's pace.
Activity in the housing sector remains
weak.
In our summary of economic projections,
the median participant projects GDP to
rise 1.6% this year and 1.8% next year,
a touch stronger than projected in June.
In the labor market, the unemployment
rate edged up to 4.3% in August, but
remains little changed over the past
year at a relatively low level.
Payroll job gains have slowed
significantly to a pace of just 29,000
per month over the past three months.
A good part of the slowing likely
reflects a decline in the growth of the
labor force due to lower immigration and
lower labor force participation.
Even so, labor demand has softened and
the recent pace of job creation appears
to be running below the break even rate
needed to hold the unemployment rate
constant.
In addition, wage growth has continued
to moderate while still outpacing
inflation.
Overall, the market slowing in both the
supply of and demand for workers is
unusual. In this less dynamic and
somewhat softer labor market, the
downside risks to employment appear to
have risen.
In our SEP, the median projection for
the unemployment rate is 4.5% at the end
of this year and edges down thereafter.
Inflation has eased significantly from
its highs in mid 2022, but remains
somewhat elevated relative to our 2%
longerrun goal.
Estimates ba estimates based on the
consumer price index and other data
indicate that total PCE prices rose 2.7%
over the 12 months ending in August and
that excluding the volatile food and
energy categories, core PCE prices rose
2.9%.
These readings are higher than earlier
in the year as inflation for goods has
picked up. In contrast, this inflation
appears to be continuing for services.
Near-term measures of inflation
expectations have moved up on balance
over the course of this year on news
about tariffs as reflected in both
market and surveybased measures.
Beyond the next year or so, however,
most measures of longer term
expectations remain consistent with our
2% inflation goal.
The median projection in the SEP for
total PCE inflation is 3.0% this year
and falls to 2.6% in 2026 and to 2.1% in
2027.
Our monetary policy actions are guided
by our dual mandate to promote maximum
employment and stable prices for the
American people.
At today's meeting, the committee
decided to lower the target range for
the federal funds rate by a quarter
percentage point to four to four and a
quarter%
and to continue reducing the size of our
balance sheet.
Changes to government policies continue
to evolve and their effects on the
economy remain uncertain.
Higher tariffs have begun to push up
prices in some categories of goods, but
their overall effects on economic
activity and inflation remain to be
seen. A reasonable base case is that the
effects on inflation will be relatively
short-lived, a one-time shift in the
price level. But it is also possible
that the inflationary effects could
instead be more persistent, and that is
a risk to be assessed and managed. Our
obligation is to ensure that a one-time
increase in the price level does not
become an ongoing inflation problem.
In the near term, risks to inflation are
tilted to the upside and risks to
employment to the downside. A
challenging situation. When our goals
are intention like this, our framework
calls for us to balance both sides of
our dual mandate. With downside risks to
employment having increased, the balance
of risks has shifted. Accordingly, we
judged it appropriate at this meeting to
take another step toward more ne a more
neutral policy stance. With today's
decision, we we remain well positioned
to respond in a timely way to potential
economic developments. We will continue
to determine the appropriate stance of
monetary policy based on the incoming
data, the evolving outlook, and the
balance of risks.
In our SCP, FOM FOMC participants wrote
down their individual assessments of an
appropriate path for the federal funds
rate based on what each participant
judges to be the most likely scenario
for the economy.
The median participant projects that the
appropriate level of the federal funds
rate will be 3.6% at the end of this
year, 3.4% at the end of 2026, and 3.1%
at the end of 2027.
This path is one quarter percentage
point lower than projected in June. As
is always the case, these individual
forecasts are subject to uncertainty,
and they're not a committee plan or
decision. Policy is not on a preset
course.
The Fed has been assigned two goals for
monetary policy: maximum employment and
stable prices. We remain committed to
supporting maximum employment, bringing
inflation sustainably to our 2% goal,
and keeping longerterm inflation
expectations well anchored. Our success
in delivering on these goals matters to
all Americans. We understand that our
actions affect communities, families,
and businesses across the country.
Everything we do is in service to our
public mission, and we at the Fed will
do everything we can to achieve our
maximum employment and price stability
goals. Thank you. I look forward to our
discussion.
>> Chris,
>> great. Uh, thank you, uh, Chris Rugver
at Associated Press. Uh, as you know,
Fed Governor Steven Myron, uh, has
continued, uh, kept his position at the
White House even as he's joined the Fed
board. This is the first time, I
believe, the Fed's board has had someone
with executive branch ties uh, in
decades. Does this compromise the Fed's
independence from day-to-day politics?
And relatedly, how can you maintain the
public's perception the Fed is
politically independent with this uh
dynamic? Thank
>> So um we did welcome a new committee
member today as we always do and the
committee remains united in pursuing our
mand our dual mandate goals. Um we're
strongly committed to maintaining our
independence and beyond that I really
don't have anything to share.
And then just as a quick follow, I'm
sorry. Can you uh you and other Fed
officials have spoken extensively about
the impact of tariffs on inflation? Um
although perhaps with many companies
appearing to eat the tariffs, uh tariffs
may be impacting the labor market and
other parts of the economy instead. Uh
do you see that as a possible outcome
here that tariffs are the reason we're
seeing some slowing particularly in the
labor market rather than in inflation?
>> Thank you, certainly possible. you know,
we were uh we're beginning to see we
have begun to see uh goods prices
showing through into higher inflation
and actually the increase in goods
prices accounts for most of the increase
in inflation or perhaps all of the
increase in inflation over the course of
this year. Um those are not very large
effects at this point. Uh and we do
expect them to uh to continue to build
over the course of uh of the rest of the
year and into next year. And you know
it's also possible and that there may be
effects on on employment but um that I
would say if you're looking at why
employment is doing what it's doing
that's much more about the change in
immigration. So the supply of workers
has obviously come way down. There's
very little growth if any in the supply
of workers and at the same time demand
for workers has also come down quite
sharply. Uh and uh to the point where we
see uh what I've called a curious
balance. It's you know typically when we
say things are in balance that sounds
good but in this case the balance is
because both supply and demand have come
down quite sharply. Uh now demand coming
down a little more sharply because we
see we now see the unemployment rate
edging up
>> Nick Timos of the Wall Street Journal.
Chair Pal, do economic conditions and
the balance of risks no longer warrant a
restrictive policy setting?
So I don't I don't think we can say we
can say that. What we can say is this
that over the course of this year we've
kept our poly policy at a restrictive
level and and people have different
views but a clearly restrictive level I
would say. So and we were able to do
that uh over the course of this year
because the labor market was in very
solid condition with strong job creation
and all those things. I think if you
start go back to April and now look at
the revised job creation numbers for for
May, June, July and August, you can kind
of I can no longer say that. So what
that means is that the risks which the
risks were clearly tilted toward
inflation. I would say they're moving
toward toward equality. Maybe they're
not quite out of equality. We don't need
to know that. But we got we do know that
they've moved meaningfully toward
greater equality. the risks between the
two goals and that suggests that we
should be moving in the direction of
neutral and that's what we did today.
>> Under what circumstances would a larger
than 25 basis points rate cut be
warranted and how seriously was that
option entertained at your meeting this
week?
>> There there wasn't widespread support at
all for for a 50 basis point cut today.
You know, I I think we've done um we've
done very large rate hikes and very
large rate cuts in the last 5 years. And
you tend to do those at a time when when
you feel that policy is out of place and
needs to move quickly to a new place.
That's not at all what what I feel
certainly now. I feel like our policy
has been doing the right thing so far
this year. I think we were right to wait
and see how tariffs and inflation and
and the labor market evolved. I think
we're now reacting to uh you know to the
the much lower level of job creation and
other evidence of softening in the labor
market and saying well those risks are
maybe maybe not fully balanced but
moving in the direction of balance now
and so that that warrants a change in
policy
>> uh Colobby Smith for the New York Times.
Um, should we be viewing today's cut as
the committee taking out some insurance
against the possibility that the labor
market is at risk of weakening or is it
the committee's view that the dynamics
of a downturn are already in place? I
guess I'm just, you know, trying to
square the shift in the rate forecast in
the SEP uh towards more cuts than just
um 3 months ago with the fact that the
forecast for unemployment didn't change.
Yeah, I I think you could think of this
in a way as a riskmanagement cut because
if you look at the SEP actually um the
projections for growth this year and
next actually ticked up just a little
bit and inflation and unemployment
didn't really move what so what what's
different now? What's different now is
that you see a very different picture of
the risks to the labor market. You've
seen, you know, we were looking at
150,000 jobs a month at the time of the
last meeting and now we see the
revisions and we see the new numbers.
And I I didn't I don't want to put too
much emphasis on on payroll job
creation, but it's just one of the
things that suggests that the labor
market is really cooling off. And that
that tells you that it's time to to take
that into account in our, you know, in
our policy.
>> So, just looking at um the SEP once
again, the median participant has
inflation higher than previously
expected by the end of next year and the
Fed not getting back to the 2% target
until 2028. So I guess I'm just
wondering how you characterize the risk
to price pressures of kicking off a
series of cuts at this point.
>> Yeah. So I I would look at it this way.
We um we fully understand and appreciate
that we need to remain fully committed
to two restoring uh 2% inflation on a
sustained basis and we will do that. At
the same time, we've got to weigh the
risks to the two goals. And I would say
since really since April I to me uh the
risks of higher and more persistent
inflation have probably become a little
less and that's partly because the labor
market has softened, GDP growth has
slowed. Um and um so I I would just say
that that uh that the risks there have
been less uh that than than one might
think. Um, and in terms of the of the
labor market, what we're seeing is it's
unemployment is still low. It's still a
relatively low rate, but we're seeing
downside risks.
>> Hi,
>> Michael McKe from Bloomberg Radio and
Television. Uh, I'm a little uh confused
by your explanation of the Fed cutting
rates because of unemployment. If you
think that most of what's happening in
the employment area is related to
immigration, which your rate cuts
wouldn't address, uh how how do you see
that uh as more important than
inflation, which has remained uh almost
a full percentage point above your
target?
>> Well, I was com I was saying that what's
happening in the labor market has more
to do with with immigration than it has
to do with tariffs. That was the the
question I was answering. So I wouldn't
say that all of what's happening in the
labor market is is due to tariffs. I
mean you clearly have a slowing in due
to immigration. You clearly have a
slowing in demand which is now perhaps
more than that in supply and we know
that because the unemployment rate has
ticked up. So um so that that's how
that's what I meant by that.
>> I think a followup uh every year since
2015 the SCP has forecast that you would
hit your target two years later. and
this year uh this SCP says you're going
to hit your target two years later. Uh
2% does not seem to be in sight. Does
that suggest that the 2% target is not
really achievable? And does this present
any credibility problems for you in
telling people that that's what you're
going to do if you can never reach it?
>> Well, I mean that you're right. It does
say we're going to get to 2% inflation
in 2028 at the end of 28. But that's,
you know, that's literally how you put
the projections together. You're you're
you're writing down a rate path which is
designed to create over the course of
the SCP, you know, time frame, 2%
inflation and maximum employment, too.
So that's that's that's all that is. You
know, we don't no one really knows where
the economy will be in three years, but
the nature of the exercise is to write
down policy that you believe would
return to the 2% goal over the at least
at least by the end of the uh exercise.
>> Thanks so much. Elizabeth Schelsey with
ABC News.
The latest inflation report shows that
prices are still going up across key
categories for many households,
including groceries. What will the Fed
do if prices pick up more?
>> So our our expectation and you can see
this consistently through the year has
been that inflation will move up this
year, but that the the effect basically
because of the effects on goods prices
from tariffs, but that uh those will
turn out to be a one-time price increase
as opposed to creating an inflationary
process. That that's been our forecast.
Pretty much every forecast all the
individual forecasts say that. We can't
just assume that though, right? We we
have to our job is literally to make
sure that that is what happens. And we
we will do that job. Right now, the
situation we're in is that we see we see
u inflation. We continue to expect it to
move up, maybe not as high as we would
have expected it to move up a few months
ago. Um the the pass through into of of
the tariffs into inflation has been
slower and smaller. the labor market has
softened. So the the case for there
being a persistent inflation outbreak is
is less uh and so that's why we think
it's time for us really to acknowledge
that the risks to the other mandate have
grown and that we should move in the
direction of of neutral. So what will we
do? We we'll do what we need to do but
we have two mandates and we try to
balance them for for a long time. Our
framework says that when when our two
goals are intention and this is quite an
unusual situation, how do we decide what
to do? Because our our tools can't do
two things at once. Um what we do is we
we ask which is farther from how far is
each from the goal and how long is it
expected to get to the goal. So and then
that's we think about those things and
we see as I mentioned we have been our
policy had been really skewed toward
inflation for a long time really. Now we
see that that there's downside risk
clearly in the labor market and so we're
moving in direction of of more neutral
policy.
>> How concerned are you about the slowdown
in the jobs market for households at
home especially younger Americans
struggling to land a job?
>> So it's it's an interesting labor market
and obviously we uh we think it's
appropriate that that we reduce our
rates so that we become more neutral
which will be which presumably will be
better for the labor market. uh you you
see um people who are sort of more at
the margins. So kids coming out of
college and and younger people,
minorities are are uh uh having a hard
time finding jobs. The overall job
finding rate is very very low. However,
the the the layoff rate is also very
low. So you've got a low a low firing,
low hiring environment. And the concern
is that if you start to see layoffs, the
people who are laid off won't there
won't be a lot of hiring going on. So
that could very quickly flow into uh
into higher unemployment. In a in a
healthier
economy, healthier labor market, there
would be jobs for those people. But now
the hiring rate is very very low. So
that's been a growing concern over the
last last few months. And it's one of
the reasons why we think it's
appropriate that we begin to we begin to
shift our policy focus uh toward a more
balanced one.
Steve,
>> Steve Leeman, CNBC. Mr. Chair, um, in
the past during Ray Cut, you used the
word recalibration
and I wonder if you pointedly did not
use it this time and in fact when you
said policy is not on a preset course,
did you mean to that as sort of the
opposite of pre of of recalibration? Are
we um meeting to meeting data point by
data point? Are we in the process here
of getting back to neutral? Thank you.
>> So, I think we are we're in a meeting by
meeting situation. We're going to be
looking at the data. You know, let me
let me say a word about the SCP really
here. So, we often point this out. the
the what the SCP is it's it's an
accumulation a accumulation of the
individual projections of 19 people
showing what they believe at a
particular moment in time to be the most
likely path for the economy and thus the
appropriate path for monetary policy as
well and as you know we don't we don't
debate or try to agree on what that is
we just write them down and accumulate
them we do sometimes discuss them and so
we always say we're not on a preset path
and we really mean that um the actual
decision decisions we make are going to
be based on the incoming data, the
evolving outlook and the balance of
risks uh at the time the decisions are
actually made. So you will have seen
that we have 10 participants out of 19
who wrote down two or more cuts for the
remainder of the year and nine who wrote
down fewer than in in fact in a good
number of cases no more cuts. So rather
than looking at we so rather than
looking at this as certainty, I I would
encourage people as always to look at
the SCP as through through the lens of
probability and and so there there are
different possible outcomes and
likelihoods rather than this one is
certain and this one isn't happening. So
that that's what I would say.
Thank you for getting to my follow-up
question which was is the dispersion in
the outlook uh a sign of uncertainty of
policy in the in in the in the meetings
to come. Thank you.
>> You know it's it is such an unusual
situation. Um ordinarily when the labor
market is weak, inflation is low and
when the labor market is really strong,
that's when you got to be careful about
inflation. So we have a situation where
we have two-sided risk and that means
there's no risk-free path. And so it's
quite a diff difficult uh situation for
policy makers and I it's it's not at all
surprising to me that you have a range
of views. It's not so much about having
different views for the path of the
economy. But it's partly that but it's
also partly about what's the right thing
to do in light of this of the tension
between the two goals. How do you weight
them? How worried are you about one
versus the other? And and so it's it's
it's natural. Well, I think it would
actually be surprising if you didn't
have a pretty wide range of views based,
you know, in this kind of highly unusual
situation and we do. So, um, but you
know, we we we get together, we discuss,
we have a great discussion, and then we
decide what to do and we act. But, uh,
you're right there that it is it's a
wide dispersion of of views, and I think
that's understandable and natural in the
current situation.
Hi, Victoria Aguida with Politico. Um,
you've talked a lot about Fed
independence and the importance of it
um, over the years, but as as markets
have questions about uh, what exactly
President Trump's intentions are with
the Fed, what would you point to as the
things they should be watching to
determine that the Fed is still making
decisions based on um, you know, e the
economic outlook rather than political
considerations.
I look it's deeply in our culture to do
to do our work based on the incoming
data and and and never consider anything
else. That's just everybody who's at the
Fed really feels strongly about that
way. So, you know, you'll know it by the
way we talk about what we're doing by by
the speeches that people give by the
decisions that we make. You'll know that
we're just still going to do that.
That's all we do. Um and we don't we
don't frame these questions at all or
see them in in terms of political
outcomes. I think when you get to
another part of Washington, everything
is seen through the lens of does it help
or hurt this political party, this
politician, you know, that's that's the
framework. And I think people find it
hard to believe that that's just that is
not at all the way we think about things
at the Fed. We're taking a longer
perspective. We're trying to, you know,
serve the American people as best we
can. So, I I think I think you'll you
would be able to tell. I don't I don't
believe we'll ever get to that place.
You know, I would say we're we're doing
our work exactly as we always have now
and people are they're making their
their arguments and and we're having a
really a great discussion around these
challenging issues. So,
>> do you see the court case around Lisa
Cook as being related to questions of
fed independence?
>> You know, I see it as a a court case
that it would be inappropriate for me to
to com comment on.
>> Uh, thanks, Mr. Chairman. and Edward
Lawrence uh from Fox Business. So, we
saw the preliminary benchmark revisions
uh down 911,000. Um the revisions for
June were the first negative revisions
we've seen since December of 2020. You
know, how can the Fed base important
decisions on rates uh and what to do
with the with the interest rates on data
that seems to be, as you've called it in
the past, noisy?
>> So, on on the QCW, um the revision that
we saw was almost exactly what we
expected. It it was amazing how close
the expectation was. So, and the reason
for that is for the last bunch of
quarters there's been a almost a
predictable overcount and I think the
you know the Bureau of Labor Statistics
really does understand this and they're
working hard to fix it. It's got to do,
of course, it has something to do with
low response rates, but it's also got to
do with what's called the birth death
model because a good amount of job
creation happens around new new
companies and how many go out of
business, how many are founded, and it's
just really hard. You you can't survey
for that. You've got to have a model
that predicts that. And it's quite
difficult to do especially when the
economy is undergoing big changes. So,
and they've they've been working on that
and are making progress on it. But I you
know the data we get is is still well
good enough for us to do our work. Uh I
to the extent we have issues around data
right now it's about low response rates.
That's happened all over all over really
response rates are just lower to surveys
now both in and out of the government.
And it's no great secret. You know we we
want higher response rates and we need
those to have you know less volatile
data. And the way to get that is to make
sure that the that the agencies that
collect the data have sufficient
resources to drive higher response
rates. It's not a complicated problem,
but that's what it takes. It's not a
mystery. That's what it takes. The other
thing I'll say, Edward, is in the case
of the jobs job creation, the first the
response rate is quite low for the first
month or lower for the first month. By
the time you get to the second or third
month, you're still collecting responses
for that last month, for that prior
month. and you get to the place where
the data are much more reliable by the
second and certainly the third month. So
it's not that we don't get the data,
it's just that we get it a little later.
>> But if if the well for the benchmarks,
if that holds, it's 51% of the jobs uh
that we thought were there weren't
really there. Uh shows a weaker market,
job market coming into this year. If you
had had that information, would it have
changed your mind related to where the
interest rates should be? Should there
have been a cut earlier? You know, we we
have to live life looking through the
windshield rather than the rearview
mirror as you know. And uh all I can
tell you is we we we see where we are
now and we take appropriate action and
we took that appropriate action today.
>> Howard,
>> uh thanks Howard Schneider with Reuters.
So um as you mentioned a minute ago,
some margins of the job market would
suggest that the slide's already
happening. Black unemployment rate in
August was above 7%. uh declining work
week, difficulty among co college
graduates finding work, high rising
youth unemployment. Why do you think a
quarter percentage point now is going to
arrest that?
>> Well, I I hadn't say that I thought a
quarter point would make a huge
difference to the economy, but you got
to look at the whole path of rates,
right? And u markets already has already
been baking in uh expectations. I mean,
our our market works through
expectations, right? So, I think our
policy path really does matter. And I
think it's important that we use our
tools to support the labor market when
we do see signs like that. I did mention
that, you know, you see um minority
unemployment going up. You see younger
people, people who are more vulnerable
economically, more susceptible to
economic cycles. That's one of the
reasons in addition to just overall
lower payroll job creation. That's that
shows you that at the margin the labor
market is weakening. I would also point
to labor force participation. some part
of the significant decline in labor
force participation over the last year
has probably been cyclical in nature
rather than just the usual aging
process. So we put all those together
and we see that that the labor market is
softening and we don't need it to soften
anymore. Don't want it to. So we we use
our tools and you know we it starts with
a 25 basis point uh rate cut but we you
know the market's also pricing in a rate
path. I'm not blessing what the market's
doing at all. I'm just saying it's not
just one action.
>> Um um as a follow-up to that, the the
growth mix right now seems very
concentrated in an investment uh and uh
on the consumer spending side in higher
income groups. Do you feel that that's
an unsustainable uh mix uh for the
economy moving forward?
>> I wouldn't say that. I mean, you're
right. Those are two we're we're getting
unusually large amounts of economic
activity through the AI AI buildout and
and corporate investment. Uh
I don't know how long that will go on.
No one does. Uh in terms of spending,
you saw that the spend the consumer
spending numbers were were well above
expectations and that may well be skewed
toward higher higher earning consumers.
There's a lot of anecdotal evidence to
suggest that. Nonetheless, it's
spending. So I mean I think the economy
is is um
you know is it's moving along. Economic
growth is going to be one and a half in
the one and a half percent or better
this year. Maybe a little better.
Forecasts have been coming up as you can
see. So uh labor market is unemployment
is is low is but you know downside risks
but it's still it's still low
unemployment rate. So uh that's how we
see it.
Hi, Stephanie Rule, MSNBC. Uh, Treasury
Secretary Scott Besson has said that the
Federal Reserve suffers from mission
creep and institutional bloat. He's now
calling for an independent review. Would
you support an independent review or are
you open to any sort of reform in any
areas of the Fed?
>> I of course am not going to comment on
anything the secretary says or really
any other uh officer says. Um, so in
terms of reform at the Fed, um, you
know, we just we just went through a
lengthy and I think very successful
process of updating our our monetary
policy framework. Um, I would say
there's a lot of work going on behind
the scenes around
um the assets we have in the Federal
Reserve Bank, Federal Reserve system and
at the board. Um, are they the right
size? We're actually going through a 10%
head head 10% headcount reduction
through the whole Fed including the
board and all the reserve banks. The the
employment employment at the Fed at the
end of that will be basically at the
same level it was more than 10 years
ago. So we will have had zero job growth
for more than a decade when we're
finished with that. And I think we'll
probably we'll probably do more than
that. So, I think we're we're certainly
open to constructive criticism and and
ways to do our jobs better,
>> but not an independent review.
>> We're certainly open to, you know, to
always trying to do better.
>> Neil,
>> Mr. Chairman, Neil Irwin with Axios. Um,
there's been some debate lately on
whether AI is already starting to affect
the labor market in terms of lower labor
demand, uh, higher productivity by
contrast. Uh, do you do you buy that? uh
and if that is true does that have
implications for for the monetary policy
setting
>> so there's there's great uncertainty
around that I think my view which is
also a bit of a guess but widely shared
I think is that you are seeing some
effects but it's not the main not the
main thing driving it and so particular
focus on young people coming out of
college uh and yeah there may be
something there it may be that that
companies or other institutions that
have been hiring younger people right
out of college are are able to use AI
bet more than they had in the past. That
may be part of the story. It's also part
of the story though that you know job
creation more broadly has slowed down.
The economy has slowed down. Uh and so
it's probably a number of things but
yeah it's it's probably a factor. Hard
to say how big it is.
Andrew.
>> Uh thanks Mr. Chairman. Um what ev what
evidence do you see of tariffs showing
up in inflation?
Well, if you you can take goods just
sort of the broad goods category and um
last year goods inflation was negative.
If you go back 25 years that was the
typical thing was was that goods
inflation was goods prices generally
went down even adjusting for quality. So
that was not the case during the
pandemic. Of course goods inflation went
very high but we had essentially
returned to zero or slightly negative
inflation. Now I think goods inflation
over the course of the past year is
1.2%. Which doesn't sound like a lot but
it's a big change. So we think I mean
analysts have different views but we
think it's contributing you know.3 or
point4 something like that to the
current core PCE inflation reading which
is 2.9%. So it's it's contributing. Um
what's what seems to be happening is
that you know the the tariffs are are
not mostly not being paid by exporters
mostly being paid by really the
companies that that sit between the
exporter and the consumer. So if you if
you buy something and you sell sell it
through retail or you use it to make a
product, you're probably taking those a
lot of those costs on and not able to
pass it fully along to the consumer yet.
That's a lot that appears to be what
we're seeing. Um, all of the all of
those companies and entities in the
middle, they'll tell you that they have
every intention of passing that through
in time, but they're not doing that now.
Consu to the consumer, the pass through
has been been pretty small. It's been
slower and later, slower and smaller
than uh than we thought. But the
evidence is it's very clear that there's
some pass through. Okay. Um, I I also
wanted to ask if you could share with us
the conditions under which you might
consider leaving the Fed in in in May.
>> I have nothing new on that for you
today.
>> Katarina.
>> Hi, Katarina Sarivo with Bloomberg News.
Um, I just wanted to follow up um on,
you know, one of your answers um just a
couple minutes ago. Um, you know, we've
often heard you talk about how you and
your colleagues, um, you know, do not
think about politics. This does not
enter the room. Um, but one of your new
colleagues, um, does come from this
world, right, where everything is seen
through this framework of, um, of
politics and of what party is being
helped and, um, and that person is still
employed by the White House. um how how
can markets and the public um interpret
um you know some of
his speeches for example and then some
of you know the forecast that we see
today I mean the median for this year
was moved um because of the introduction
of his forecast I'm talking about the
number of uh rate cuts seen this year um
what do you you know what do you say to
to markets and the public that are
trying to interpret um you know what you
guys are name.
>> So there there's 12 12 voter 19
participants of of whom 12 vote as you
know on a rotating basis. So no one
voter you know can really the the only
way for any voter to really move things
around is to be incredibly persuasive
and the only way to do that in the
context in which we work is to make
really strong arguments based on the
data and your one's understanding of the
economy. that's really all that matters
and uh that that's how it's going to
work and um I I think that's that is the
way the the institution that's in the
DNA of the institution that's not going
to change. And then I wanted to ask
about a Gallup poll that showed that um
Americans now have more confidence in
the president than the Federal Reserve
when it comes to doing what's right for
the economy. Why do you think that is?
And and what's your response? What's
your message to the public? Our response
is we're going to do everything we can
to use our tools to achieve the goals
that Congress has given us and we're not
going to get distracted by by anything.
So I think that's that's what we're
going to do. We're just going to keep
doing our jobs.
>> Claire Jones, Financial Times. Um given
the range of views expressed prior to
the meeting, I think there was a lot
less dissent today than a lot of people
expected, it'd be good to know just what
you think the drivers were of coming to
that very strong consensus in the
meeting and also on the flip side to
just explain why the dot pot plots are
really so scattered between you know
someone even expecting rates to end up
higher by the end of the year to to five
cuts. I mean what were the kind of range
of views you had about on one side why
there was so much support for a cut
today and on the flip side why there's
so much divergence about what comes next
>> so I think there's quite a wide react uh
a wide assessment that um the situation
has changed with respect to the labor
market whereas we could still say and
did say in July at the time of the July
meeting that the labor market was in
solid condition and we could point to
150,000 jobs per month and many other
things. Um, I think that the new data
that we've had and it's not just
payrolls, it's it's uh other things as
well suggests that there really is
meaningful downside risk. I said there
was downfront risk then, but I think
that that downside risk is now a reality
and and there's clearly more downside
risk. So, I think that was I think
that's broadly accepted. And so, that
meant different things for different
people. some uh you know some wrote down
almost everyone wrote down supported
this cut and um some supported more cuts
and some didn't as you will see from the
dot plot so it's just the way that's
just the way it is I mean people have
it's it's uh you have people who take
this work very seriously think about it
all the time do their work uh discuss it
with our colleagues you know we
endlessly discuss this in uh between
ourselves and then we have a meeting
where we put it all out on the table and
this is what you get and you're right
there is a there's a range of views in
the dots and and I think that's like I
said uh very unsurprising given the
quite unusual historically unusual
nature of the challenges that we face.
But let's let's remember though the
unemployment rate is 4.3%.
The economy is growing at 1 and a.5%. So
um it's not a bad economy or anything
like that. We've seen much more
challenging economic times, but from a
policy standpoint, the standpoint of
what we're trying to accomplish, it's
challenging to know what what to do.
There are, as I mentioned earlier, there
no risk-free paths now. Uh it's not
incredibly obvious what to do. So, we
have to keep our eye on inflation. At
the same time, we cannot ignore and must
keep our eye on on maximum employment,
which is those are our two equal goals.
and you will see that there are just
there a range of views on on on what to
do. Nonetheless, we came together today
at the meeting and and and uh acted with
a high degree of unity
>> Argie.
>> Thank you. Archie Hall from the
economist. You you mentioned earlier
that job creation was running below your
guess at its break even rate. I'd be
curious to hear a bit more about that
and where you think the break even rate
is.
you know, so there there are many
different ways to to calculate it and um
none of them is perfect, but you know,
it's it's clearly come way down there.
There you you could you could say it's
somewhere between zero and 50,000 and
you'd be right or wrong. I mean, there
just many different ways to do it. Um so
whatever wherever it was 150,000 200,000
a few months ago it's come down quite
significantly and that's because very a
very lower amount of people are joining
the labor force. The labor force really
not growing much at this point and
that's that's a lot of where the uh the
supply of labor was coming from over the
last three uh two or three years. So
we're not getting that now. We're also
we've got much lower demand. You know,
it's interesting uh that supply and
demand have really come down together so
far, except now we do have inflation,
sorry, unemployment ticking up outside
just one tick outside of the the range
where it's been for a year. Uh 4.3% is
still a low level, but um you know, I
think this level of this speedy decline
in both supply and demand has certainly
gotten everyone's attention.
>> Follow up if I may. You you mentioned
the downside risk to employment a fair
amount, but it's striking that measures
of kind of activity and output for the
third quarter, those that we have seem
pretty strong. The Atlanta Fed's GDP now
is is very strong. You mentioned strong
PC numbers as well. How do you square
those things? Is there is there a chance
actually could be upside risk to the
labor market if those activity measures
are right?
>> Well, that that would be great. That
we'd love that to happen. Um, so I don't
know that you see a big tension there,
but it's gratifying to see that that
economic activity is holding in and
it's, you know, so it's it's a good a
good bit from consumption. It looks like
consumption was stronger than expected.
what we got earlier this uh this week I
guess but and also we're getting you
know a fairly narrow sector is is
producing a lot of economic activity
which is the the AI buildout and um you
know business investment. So I you know
we watch all of it and uh I would say we
we you know we we did move up the median
for growth for this year actually moved
up in the SCP between the June and
September uh SCPs. So, uh, and and
really the inflation and labor market
didn't change much. It's really the
risks that we're seeing to the labor
market that that, uh, that were the
focus of today's decision.
>> Nicole,
>> hi, Nicole. Good with Barren. Thank you
for taking my question. Uh given the
cumulative impact of high interest rates
on the housing sector, I'm wondering how
concerned you are that current rate
levels are exacerbating housing
affordability issues and potentially
hindering household formation and wealth
accum uh accumulation for a segment of
the population.
>> You know, housing is is an
interestsensitive activity. So, it's at
the very center of uh monetary policy.
when um when the pandemic hit and we cut
rates to zero, uh the housing housing
companies were incredibly grateful and
and it was really they said that was the
only thing that kept them going was that
we we cut so aggressively and provided
credit and things like that and they
were able to finance because because we
did that. The other side of that is when
inflation gets high and we raise rates
and it it you're right, it does burden
the housing industry and uh so rates
have come down a bit and as that happens
we don't set the we don't set mortgage
rates but our policy rate changes do
tend to affect mortgage rates and that
has been happening and that'll that'll
of course raise demand. um lower
borrowing rates for uh for builders will
help you know get builders will help
supply uh and so some of that should
happen. I I think most analysts think
that it would have to be pretty big
changes for it to matter a lot for the
big changes in rates for the for to
matter a lot for the housing sector. And
the you know the other thing is by you
know by achieving maximum employment and
price stability that's a strong economy
that's a good economy for for housing.
And then the last thing I'll say is uh
you know there's a deeper problem here.
There's not a cyclical problem that the
Fed can address and that just is a a
pretty much nationwide housing shortage
or a lot of places in the country just
don't have enough enough housing for
people. Uh and and you know all of the
areas around metropolitan areas like
Washington for example are very built up
and so you're having to build farther
and farther out and that that uh so
that's where it is. And just a quick
followup, during the last SCP or the
press conference following the last SCP,
you seem to indicate that policy makers
lacked conviction about their
projections and I'm wondering if you
still feel that way.
>> You know, forecasts uh forecasting is
very difficult even in placid times and
and as as I've mentioned before,
forecasters are a humble lot with much
to be humble about. So, uh, I think
right now is a particularly challenging
time, even more uncertain than usual.
And so, I don't know any forecaster
anywhere really. Ask ask any of the
forecasters whether they have great
confidence in their forecast right now.
I think they'll honestly say no.
>> Jennifer,
>> thank you, Chair Pal. Jennifer Shawn
Burgerer with Yahoo Finance. If you're
cutting rates, why continue to reduce
the size of your balance sheet then
pause the unwinding?
>> Well,
I think we're, you know, we're cutting
the size of our balance sheet quite
marginally now. As you know, with the
balance sheet, um we're we're still in
in an abundant reserves condition and
we're we've said that we would stop
somewhat above uh a a um somewhat above
an ample reserves level. That's what
that's what we are and we're you know
we're getting closer to that. We're
monitoring it very carefully. We don't
think that that has at all significant
uh macroeconomic effects. These are
pretty small numbers moving around
inside a giant economy. You know the
number that the level of runoff is not
not very large. So I wouldn't attribute
macroeconomic consequences to that at
this point.
>> And at his recent confirmation hearing,
Steven Myin brought up that the Fed
actually has three mandates from
Congress. not just jobs and stable
crisis, but also moderate long-term
interest rates. So, what does Congress
mean by moderate long-term interest
rates? How should we understand that
when we see the 10-year Treasury moving?
And how do you think about this part of
the mandate when policy choices like
rate cuts or balance sheet reductions
affect the long end of the yield curve?
So, um, we always think of it as the
dual mandate, maximum employment and
price stability for a long time because
we think moderate long-term interest
rates are something that will result
from stable inflation, low and stable
inflation and and maximum employment.
So, we don't we don't haven't we haven't
thought about that as for a very long
time as a third mandate that requires
independent action. So that's where that
is and there's there's no there's no
thought of as far as I'm concerned
there's no thought of considering that
you know considering that we somehow
incorporate that in as something in a
different way.
>> Thanks Chair Po Matt Eaggan from CNN. We
re we we uh recently learned that
average FICO credit scores are down this
year by two points, the most since 2009
during the Great Recession and
delinquencies are high for car loans,
personal loans, credit cards. How
concerned, if at all, are you about the
health of consumer finances and do you
expect today's cut will help?
So, you know, we're aware of that. I
think this default rates have been um
kind of ticking up and we do watch that.
um they're not at a level I don't
believe they're at at a level where
overall they're they're you know
terribly concerning but it is something
that we watch you know lower rates
should support economic activity I don't
know that one rate cut will have you
know a visible effect on that but over
time you know a strong economy with a
strong labor market um is what we're
what we're aiming for and stable and
stable prices so that should help. Just
to follow up, this rate cut is coming at
a time when the stock market is at or
near all-time highs and some valuation
metrics are elevated historically. Is
there a risk that cutting rates could
overheat financial markets potentially
fueling a bubble?
>> You know, we we're tightly focused on
our goals, right? And our goals are
maximum employment and price stability.
And so we take the actions that that we
take with a with an eye on the on those
goals. Separately uh and that's what we
why we did what we did today. Separately
we monitor financial stability very very
carefully and you know I would say it's
a it's a mixed picture but households
are in good shape, banks are in good
shape overall. Households are still in
in good shape in the aggregate. And I
know that people at the lower end of the
income spectrum are are under pressure
obviously, but um from a financial
stability perspective, we monitor that
picture. We don't have a view that
there's a right or wrong level of asset
prices for any particular financial
asset, but we monitor the whole the
whole picture. Really looking for
structural v vulnerabilities and I would
say those are not elevated right now.
>> Jean, we'll go to you for the last
question.
Hi, Chair Powell. Gene Young with MNI
Market News. Um, I wanted to ask about
inflation expectations. Um, you've said
the Fed can't take the stability of
inflation expectations for granted. Um,
you mentioned at the short run they've
gone up a little bit. I wonder if you
can talk a bit a bit about that. Um, and
then also at the long run, I'm wondering
do you see evidence that the debate over
Fed independence and the growing deficit
is putting pressure on inflation
expectations?
So, as you as you said, um, shorter term
inflation expectations have tended to
respond to near-term inflation. So, if
inflation goes up, uh, inflation
expectations will predict that it takes
just a little while to get back down.
Unfortunately, throughout this uh this
period, longerterm inflation
expectations, both both break even in
the markets and almost all of the longer
term surveys, Michigan being a bit of an
outlier lately, uh have have have been
just rock solid in terms of, you know,
uh running at levels that are consistent
with 2% inflation over time. So, we
don't take that for granted. We we
actually assume that our actions have a
real effect on that and that, you know,
we need to, you know, continually show
and and also mention discuss our
commitment to to 2% inflation. And so
you'll hear us doing that. Um it's but
you know, we're as I mentioned, it's a
difficult situation because we have we
have risks that are both affecting the
labor market and inflation. Those are
our two goals. And so we have to balance
those two when they're both at risk. We
have to balance them. And that's really
what we're trying to do. I don't in ter
your latter latter part of your question
was about uh independence. I you know I
don't I don't see market participants uh
I don't see that that's something
they're factoring in right now in terms
of setting interest rates.
>> Thank you.
>> Thanks very much.
>> That wraps up the news conference with
Chairman Pal down in Washington DC. Here
in New York City, we're reacting to a 25
basis point rate cut from the Federal
Reserve, a descent pushing for 50 basis
points, and a huge, huge debate about
the future. Anna Wong of Bloomberg
Economics with this to say, "I have not
seen a meeting with so many
contradictions. This is a low conviction
Federal Reserve with limited vis limited
visibility and a very wide range of
views on the future. And this is why
this market is so confused, captured by
this move in the equity market on the
S&P 500. Move lower, move higher, all
over the place. This market is somewhat
shaken. Bremo. This Federal Reserve has
no idea what 2026 is going to bring. And
this chairman did his best to articulate
that.
>> And I don't know that he sent a clear
message because it's not possible to
send a clear message. That sound you
hear, that's the idea of forward
guidance dying. Because ultimately, how
can a Federal Reserve with this level of
dispersion in views really give any
sense of their reaction function? And to
me, the idea that he said there wasn't
widespread support at all for a 50 basis
point rate cut. And talking about this
is a riskmanagement rate cut flew in the
face of the hopes and dreams of markets
that were hoping.
>> That's brilliant about Ford guidance
just evaporating. And John, it goes back
to when you looked into the other room
here, the south wing of our studios, and
you looked at the dot plot and the
dispersion looked like a B-52 bomber's
wingspan.
>> Massive spread.
>> Massive.
>> We can talk about it right now, TK. At
the very bottom of that spread is a dot
that's basically projecting a massive
amount of rate cuts for the
>> political dot.
>> A sub 3% dot.
>> Tom, look above it. You've also got a
dot there that's looking for a Federal
Reserve that could be hiking interest
rates over the next several meetings.
These dots are all over the place and
Brao, you nailed it. A riskmanagement
rate cut, two-sided risk, no risk-free
path in a meeting by meeting situation.
I think the chairman did his best here
to form a consensus that probably didn't
exist on the committee when they got
together for the first day just
yesterday.
>> Yeah, I think that that's well said. He
even talked about the labor market that
clearly you can no longer say it's very
solid. But then he went on to say that
any kind of headline disappointment was
due to the immigration picture probably
in a significant part. This is the
reason why it is it is a Federal Reserve
that is unable to really present forward
guidance because ultimately we don't
even know who will be doing the guiding
and who will be doing the uh the
decision-m come next year. And that is
the reason why there's so many questions
about that outlier. Tom called it a
political dot. That political dot
potentially has quite a bit of weight.
>> Might be a flavor of things to come in
26 and beyond. Joining us now to discuss
the former New York Fed President, Bill
Dudley. Bill, welcome to the program,
sir. A lot to process here, many
contradictions. Is that a fair way of
describing this meeting?
>> I think there's a lot of tension between
the inflation outlook and the labor
market outlook. But I think Paul said it
pretty well. I mean, he said basically
what we think that the risks on the
unemployment side have risen more than
the risk on the inflation side. And so
given that, we should be less
restrictive. And so we're taking out
essentially a riskmanagement cut to
reflect the fact that the risks on on
the litter market seem to be a little
bit higher. Um you know after that you
know there's a lot of uncertainty about
uh you know how that's going to evolve
in 2026 and 2027 and the committee you
know is split about what to do uh going
forward. You know, I think it's
interesting. The market reaction
initially was like, "Oh, gee, two more
rate cuts this year." And then I think
people parsed the summary of economic
projections a little bit more and
realized that it was actually nine to
nine plus Mren. So, nine people wanted
either no more cuts or or one more cut.
Uh, and nine wanted two more cuts. And
then there was Steve Mur who who who I'm
absolutely confident that that's that's
his dot.
>> Well, Bill, I think a lot of people
would agree with you. I just wonder
going forward how much you are satisfied
by Fed Chair Powell's response to why
they're upgrading their expectation for
inflation. Why they always put the idea
of 2% two years out and why they are
still cutting even though they have not
achieved that in more than 5 years.
>> Well, if he didn't think policy was
restrictive today, then he certainly
they certainly would have cut. But he's
starting with the premise that policy is
restrictive. it's exerting downward uh
restraint on the economy and we and
basically given that the balance of the
risk have shifted towards greater risk
to the downside on on the labor market
side. He wants policy to be somewhat
less restrictive. So this is a very
modest adjustment and I I don't think
there's a lot of you know I don't think
there's four guidance at this point
really that that's meaningful because it
really is going to depend on how the
market you know the econ economy
evolves. I mean look at look at the data
just over the last couple months. You
know we have weakness on in the in in
the labor market and then we seem to
have strength in terms of GDP and and
spending. Uh so you know the the Atlanta
Fed GDP now forecast for now cast for
the third quarter is at 3.4%. So there's
a lot of uncertainty on the outlook but
you know this is an this is an insurance
rate cut. That's that's all it is and it
doesn't really foreshadow what's going
to happen going forward. Bill Dudley,
you're one of our best at dovetailing
the dynamics of market economics into
our academics. I think a Robert Hall who
was at Berkeley and he went over to a
school across the bay. I can't remember
the name of it. Uh right now, Bill, I
look at the inflation. Let's take East
Hampton, Massachusetts, where when you
were a kid, you were in school there.
Sewage rates are up 33%
in the last 24 months. Is this a Fed
looking at a purchasing power crisis for
too many Americans out to the December
10th meeting and into next year?
>> Well, there's definitely a squeeze on
lowincome households. They don't benefit
by the rise in the stock market. They
don't benefit by the fact that they're
locked, you know, they hold, you know,
3% mortgage mortgages. Uh they're hurt
by the the the higher tariffs. Uh
they're hurt by the weaker labor market.
And so it's it's really a tale of two uh
uh economies in terms of the uh outlook.
Uh monetary policy is a very blunt
instrument and unfortunately the Fed
can't calibrate monetary policy to sort
of equally help everybody uh in the
current environment.
>> So who do they do it for? John Global
Wall Street. Is that the mandate?
>> You know I was thinking back to TK my
days back at school when I was a kid. If
I kept telling my mom in two years I'll
do better. In two years I'll do better.
I'm sure my mom at some point would lose
patience. Bill, should we lose patience
with this Federal Reserve? What is this?
In two years time, we'll hit our
inflation target. In two years time,
we'll hit our inflation target. Mike
McKe addressed this in the news
conference, and I actually think it's a
really important moment. How credible is
this pursuit of 2%.
>> Well, I think it's a fair point that,
you know, every
every it's always two years later, we're
going to finally achieve our inflation
objective. Um, you know, the Fed's
basically trying to, as Chair Paul made
it very clear, he's trying, they're
trying to balance the fact that the two
goals are intention. Uh, and so if they
just focused on driving immediately to
the 2% inflation goal, that would lead
to much higher uh, unemployment. And so
they want to balance those two risks.
But, you know, the risk to the Fed is
that every year you you continue to go
with inflation above 2%. The risk is
that inflation expectations finally
become unanchored. And the attacks on
the Fed's independence obviously
increase that risk. Bill Dudley with the
latest. Thank you, sir. Appreciate your
reaction. Thanks for standing by. The
former New York Fed President Mike McKe
was in that news conference. It was an
important moment, I think. And Mike McKe
joins us now for more. Mike, first of
all, your assessment of the last 60
minutes or so. And what did you make of
that exchange you had with the Fed
chair?
>> Well, in the last 60 minutes or so, I
think Jal was trying to walk a very fine
line because he's got a very divided
committee. Nobody is sure what's going
to happen going forward except for
Steven Meyer who thinks that things are
going to be absolutely rosy and we need
to cut rates a lot. Uh everyone else is
uncertain and the dot plot median shows
two rate cuts this year but when you
look at the dot plot itself it's so
narrowly divided that you really can't
take any signal from it as Bill Dudley
was saying. So Paul is trying to tell
people that we really don't know without
saying we really don't know. and as Bill
said trying to make this an insurance
cut. The 2% thing I think is a real
question for them and he didn't really
give a good answer to my question. It's
not just that uh un that inflation
expectations become unanchored but that
higher expectations can become embedded
and people don't think you're going to
get it down farther. And so then how do
you fight that going forward if you
can't make any progress or can't be seen
to be making any progress towards your
target?
>> Mike, while you're down there, since you
are in the room, it sounded like Fed
press conference language. We did get a
statement. We did get a rate decision,
but can you tell us and just describe to
us how different this Fed meeting felt,
what it looked like, what kind of
changes were made?
Well, I'll tell you, there's a lot more
press here than usual. That's one thing
that it looked like. Uh the the changes
are the kind of things that you would
see in the statement when they're
changing policy, which they did. The dot
plot may be a little bit more uh
confusing uh less uh guidance in it than
we had seen before. And there was
obviously some tension between uh what
the rate cut medians were with what the
economic projection medians were. But
overall, it went off pretty much as they
usually do. Uh the the the Fed's
statement wasn't that unusual. There
obviously was the big elephant in the
room of Steven Myron that the chairman
declined to comment on. He also declined
to comment on Lisa Cook. He tried to
keep it just uh to the Fed. Uh so it's
it really wasn't a hugely different
dynamic except that there were a lot
more moving parts than we often see or
at least than we've seen in a number of
years.
>> Mike, just before you go, there was a
moment there where I do think he
addressed the governor Marin question,
the importance of one individual on the
committee and how much sway they have on
the FOMC, how they've got to persuade
the other individuals in the room. And
Mike, I think it begs the question if
that Steven Myron dot, that Governor
Myron dot sub 3% is a flavor of things
to come, Mike, to what extent this
committee will push back.
>> Well, clearly the committee pushed back
today and we didn't see a disscent from
Mickey Bowman or Chris Waller. So, they
seem to be satisfied with where they are
at the moment. And that suggests that
Steven Myin is not going to have a lot
of influence. Nobody really expected him
to. It does raise the question though,
John, as you uh sort of implied there
that if the president gets more people
on the board, where do we go from here
and the myron dot is a sign that the
president's people would definitely try
to push rates lower whether or not the
economy justifies it.
>> Mike McKe with the latest. Mike a clinic
as always. You're one of the very best.
Appreciate your time. I think it would
be a massive mistake just to say that's
all political. We had this conversation
with Greg Peterson of Pichim right
before the news conference. He said,
"What's political and what's real?"
Whatever you think is political right
now might be real next year. That might
be a flavor of what's still to come from
the incoming chairman for 2026. And it's
not just about being able to persuade
the rest of the committee. It's a
question about how credible it will be
with fixed income and broader markets.
>> And right now, it seems like it was
credible to the extent that it's not
causing some sort of massive sell-off in
long-term yields. I do think it's
notable that there was only one disscent
about a 50 basis point rate cut and I
think we have to keep going back to that
that Steven Myron was alone. He didn't
get a sort of concurrent opinion from
Mickey Bowman or Chris Waller.
>> We got to get to Jeff Rosenberg but John
I was going to go to Mike on this. So
let let me just bring it up. April 29
next year, June 17th next year, July 29,
I think there's an election just after
the October 28 meeting. When does House
politics or even Senate politics come
into this discussion with a vengeance? I
don't know when it is.
>> I think we're right there right now.
>> Yeah.
>> You know, before this decision, Tom, we
sat around the table and I said, "This
is the last set of forecasts you'll get
from Chairman Pal without knowing who
the incoming Fed chair is going to be."
And I think we can say that by the time
we get to December, we'll know who the
Fed chair is. We expect to know who the
Fed chair is. And you're also going to
know what they think about where policy
should be in 2026. And that's going to
bring a very different flavor to the
meeting at the end of this year.
Chairman Pow did the best job he could
possibly do in that news conference
given all the contradictions of this
moment. Not just about the
contradictions within the committee. The
contradictions almost all over the
place. The fact we've had the step down
in payrolls growth that we've had and
unemployment has been super super stable
over that period. the fact we're looking
for a better growth profile for 26 yet
at the same time we're talking about
more rate cuts not less it's a very
unusual environment and I think the
chairman did the best he could do given
the circumstances to communicate that
>> yeah and I think that if he did sound a
little bit like word salad occasionally
probably was to be forgiven just based
in the fact that there aren't good
answers to any of these things
especially given the descent that you're
getting on the committee
>> Jeff Rosenberg of BlackRock joins us now
for more Jeff welcome to the program we
often say you and I the first move isn't
always the right move and we'll see if
it sticks in financial markets, but what
do you make of this move in response to
some of the contradictions we've heard
over the last 90 minutes?
>> Yeah, you guys have covered a lot of it.
I'd say, you know, the three big
takeaways for me, you know, number one,
it's it's the validation of the Waller
Bowman critique from from the summer. Uh
it's not unexpected, but it's important
to recognize, you know, that was the
first thing that the markets reacted to,
the change in language in the statement.
uh and it clearly was echoed by Powell
in in the press conference that the
impact of the revisions on the data. He
kind of like focused on it and then
said, well, it's not just that, but then
he went back to it again and again. And
so that was the first takeaway is this
labor market slowdown has clearly
resonated. It's shifted the the the
balance of risks. And that was the
initial market reaction. Rates went
lower and they were they were a bit
positive on that. But when we got into
the press conference, it became a little
bit less focused on that and more about
the forward uh uh 2026 2027 outlook. And
that's where my second point is is kind
of a big takeaway here is that the bond
market and the 20 uh year end 25 outlook
are are basically aligned. It's when you
look further out into those projections
relative to where the bond market is
pricing where there's a lot of
disagreement. And it gets to this notion
of the spread that you were talking
about before in the dots as you as you
as you look at the dispersion there. And
finally here, I think you mentioned it
before, you know, going into the meeting
there was a lot of, you know,
uncertainty about whether you'd get more
than one descent, whether Waller and
Bowman would advocate for a faster move.
They didn't. They were kind of on board
with this adoption of the balance of
risk shifting. And I think that's
important in terms of validating that
earlier point I just made that, you
know, bond markets for the end of this
year are kind of right on line with
where the Fed is. I think the disconnect
into next year is interesting and that's
going to have to be resolved.
>> I guess Jeeoff, how much does this
increase uh the weight of just how many
seats the president has to fill given
the fact that as John and Tom were
talking about, we did see push back from
the other members from going 50 basis
points. didn't see that coalescing
around that view.
>> Yeah, that's going to be a big issue and
I think that's part of what you're
seeing in terms of the disconnect
between the dots today and the bond
market expectations for the path of of
policy rates in 2026 because the path of
actual policy rates is what the bond
market is pricing and the path that's
written down today is based on the
current makeup, right? And so that's
where you see like effectively a
disconnect in in the bond market
incorporating the possibility of a
different makeup of the FOMC underlying
the expectations or the distribution of
outcomes for where policy rates evolve
beyond the near- term where you see
really clear alignment. Jeff Rosenberg,
I assume you survived probability and
statistics at ter at Carnegie Melon.
What's a standard error these fancy guys
at the Fed are working with? How certain
can we be of the path forward? Are they
really making it up meeting to meeting
as they go?
>> Yeah, it it gets to this dispersion
within the dots. And it gets to
something Powell talked uh he mentioned
a couple of times which I think is a
really important way of thinking about
and framing this moment in time for the
bond market and for how the bond market
follows what the what the Fed does. And
he said there is no risk-free path. And
that's a really important concept. And
what he means by no risk-free path is
that there's risks to airing on the dual
mandate. A little question about the
third third mandate in there later, but
there's a risk to the dual mandate if
you pursue the maximum employment and
you put the inflation at risk. And vice
versa, if you focus on inflation, you
put the employment at risk. And that's a
very uncomfortable and unfamiliar spot.
We we we we called it before we got into
the postcoid environment of too much
inflation. We called it divine
coincidence of monetary policy. The
policy mandates were aligned. They never
faced that conflict. And so bond markets
never faced the uncertainty that the
dispersion in the dots is reflecting.
And there's really no resolution of
that. It's going to be the data and and
what is the marginal change in data that
the market's focused on that the Fed's
focused on. And the marginal change is
that employment has been the big
downward revision. inflation has kind of
been persistently above target as we
talked about going on five years in the
projections but it's not accelerating
and that's the key it's what's the rate
of change between the dual mandate right
now it's all on the labor markets and
that's going to keep its focus that may
change and as that changes so
>> absolutely brilliant John what this
amounts to is is it a new data
dependency
>> they've made a choice and I think we
should respect that fact Jeff you can
always fall into the trap of suggesting
what the Fed should do what it shouldn't
do. Jeff, the chairman saying there's no
risk-free path, but the committee's made
a choice to cut interest rates, to
signal more to come. If there is a
consensus is to cut again, cut again,
and cut again. Now, Jeff, as a market
participant, you've got to respect that
the Federal Reserve has made a choice to
take that risk. And I want to understand
from your perspective how credible you
think the pursuit of 2% actually is. and
as a bond investor, how your approach to
a market should change given the
information that you've had this
afternoon.
>> Well, and it was in your conversation
with Mike McGee and his his question,
you know, the risk is they lose
credibility on the 2% number. Now, you
can get stable prices at 3%. As long as
it's not accelerating, but you're not
reaching your target. So, it's shifting
the target and you lose the credibility
and the anchoring to a 2% level. What
does that mean? It means a higher level
of long-term interest rates. It means a
higher level of term premium. And to the
extent that you get more variability as
a result of not only hitting 2% but
being persistently above it, you get a
higher inflation risk premium. And all
those things factor into how we price in
term premium, the value of the long end
of the curve, the value of inflation,
inflation protection. And the longer you
go on above that 2% target, the the the
more and more we start to price those
things in. But my earlier comments is
right now everybody's focused on the
labor markets. And the key here, the key
presumption that we're going to test is
is that inflation that's still coming
down the pipe in terms of the tariff
pass through, is that oneoff? Everyone's
pricing it in to be oneoff. Hopefully
that's correct. But the data and the
evolution of the data and the relative
change between the inflation and the
labor market data is going to shift that
focus. Right now the back end's pretty
contained uh because the inflation data
isn't accelerating at the same time as
the labor market is decelerating.
>> Yeah. But Jeeoff, to build on what
John's talking about, if this is
essentially a central bank that has
chosen and they chose the labor market
over inflation, then you would expect
there to be a much bigger risk premia on
some of the long-term bond yields. It
just it's come off. And I just wonder
if, let's say, President Trump selects
Chris Waller to be the next Fed chair,
how much does that risk premium come
back because it takes off the prospect
of more aggressive yield curve control?
In other words, how much is a sort of
subdued reaction in long-term bonds sort
of predicated on this idea that this
will be a very creative Federal Reserve
and a very creative Treasury Department.
I I I mean I think on the prospects of
of innovation and and a change in in in
policy, I think a lot of it will have to
be the the the actual actions as opposed
to the potential for those actions. Very
hard for the bond market to price in
those changes in policy until the
likelihood of those other scenarios in
terms of policy innovation are more
clearly identifiable in terms of in
terms of the probabilities. right now
they mean they they remain kind of in
the realm of possibility but as long as
they're in the realm and not in the
likelihood it's hard to price those
things in. I think the second piece
around it is really going to be how the
data evolves to inform both those policy
choices and the relative tradeoff
between this lack of risk-free path. If
inflation is accelerating and the labor
markets are not decelerating then the
shift in the focus can flip to
inflation. How do policy makers react to
that? And is that reaction consistent
with with how the bond market is
pricing? I think that's how we'll evolve
as we see these changes in in in in
policy uh alongside the changes in data.
>> If we get chair Rick Reer, I'm loading
up on bonds. Okay, Jeff, I'm going to
let you go. You don't have to respond to
that. Don't get in trouble.
>> Thank you very much.
>> You run. Jeff Rosenberg of Black Rockck.
Thank you, sir. Governor Myron, what are
the odds he becomes chairman Myron? What
are the odds that someone like him joins
the committee and what would that do to
the perception of this Federal Reserve
and how would it change financial
markets? That dot there is really really
important for 2026 and how we should be
thinking about this institution and what
their approach will be, how it will
change, how persuasive, how credible it
might be. We've got to ask some big big
questions about next year for monetary
policy and financial markets. Yeah. And
the difficulty in understanding whether
the market is actually responding to
that dot, right? Are we getting a sense
of what the market's reaction would be
to that type of approach to monetary
policy or are people dismissing it? This
is not somebody who was able to get some
of the other members to come on board
with him. And so it is just one person
on a committee.
>> More than ages, years, I'm looking to
meeting to meeting. It's a Fed that's
going to be overcome by events.
>> Will you wake up a little bit earlier
and join us tomorrow? Do you fancy that?
I I can stay in bed. Come in. No, you
know.
>> What do we have to pay TK to make you
wake up earlier in the morning?
>> I I got to the the Bentley. It's the
getting the car down Fifth Avenue is
really difficult.
>> It's difficult.
>> But if you want,
>> you know, they talk about the halves and
the nots.
>> Talk to my people.
>> This right here,
>> just buy a Bentley.